The lived experience of commuters along the Gagalangin-Divisoria route is heavily shaped by two major environmental threats: air and noise pollution. According to Garcia et al. (2025), the old engines of traditional jeepneys release high amounts of particulate matter (PM2.5) and black carbon (BC). These are toxic, tiny particles in the air that are small enough to be inhaled deep into the lungs, leading to long-term serious breathing risks. This explains why many commuters and drivers feel physical discomfort, coughing, or exhaustion after their trip.

On top of the dirty air, Roxas et al. (2025) point out that commuters are also subject to noise pollution. In Metro Manila, traffic noise averages around 70.81 dB (decibels), which is a unit used to measure how loud a sound is. This level is high enough to cause permanent hearing damage and mental stress over time. This constant noise makes people more irritable and less productive. Together, these studies show that the "lived experience" of a commuter is a struggle against two major burdens: toxic air and deafening noise. To remedy this, the philippines government proposed a modernization program to mitigate these hazards, improving the overall lived experience and well being of the public commuting.

# Garcia et al., 2025
- The Philippines boasts nearly 250,000 PUJ units, with a quarter of them concentrated in  Metro Manila. These vehicles traverse extensive networks of routes, connecting communities  and facilitating essential mobility (Mejia et al., 2017)
- It is  not confined to gaseous pollutants alone; it encompasses the realm of fine particulate matter (PM), a category that includes carbonaceous aerosols (CA)
- Black  carbon (BC) particles, often born of incomplete combustion processes, exhibit a uniform and  potent ability to absorb sunlight.
- Beyond the scope of their atmospheric impact, carbonaceous aerosols, alongside organic  carbon (OC) and its various subsets (including primary or secondary OC, water-soluble OC,  HULIS, PRLIS, etc.), play pivotal roles in shaping regional air quality, human health, and  environmental well-being.
- In the context of Metro Manila, where PUJs are prevalent, their aging diesel enginesoften poorly maintained and lacking modern emission controls—exhibit higher combustion  inefficiencies. This results in significantly elevated emissions of black carbon (BC) and  organic carbon (OC), both key components of carbonaceous aerosols and major contributors  to urban air pollution.
- The emissions from these PUJs not only contribute to local air pollution but also have  broader implications for climate change due to the radiative properties of BC. As such,  addressing the emissions from these vehicles is crucial for both local air quality and global  climate considerations. Thus, it is essential to characterize and understand the accumulation  of emissions from PUJs.
- Additionally, recent studies have also examined the broader implications of PUJ  operations and modernization. Balanay and Lungu (2009) reported that PUJ drivers in Manila  experience significant exposure to volatile organic compounds.
# Gotangco et al., 2025
- Air pollution in the Philippines has serious health implications, with annual damages estimated at USD 87 billion (*[Tantengco, O.A.G., Guinto, R.R., 2022. Tackling air pollution in the Philippines. The Lancet Planetary Health 6 (4)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-624X\(25\)00006-9/h0235).*). Emissions from jeepneys in particular account for 94 % of urban soot particle mass in Metro Manila, Philippines
- PM2.5 or fine particulate matter are particles with diameters less than 2.5 μm. Due to the ability of PM2.5 to penetrate deep into the lungs, it is linked to severe health effects, including enhanced mortality as well as cardiovascular, respiratory, and allergic diseases (*Shiraiwa, M., Ueda, K., Pozzer, A., Lammel, G., Kampf, C.J., Fushimi, A., et al., 2017. Aerosol health effects from molecular to global scales. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 13545–13567.3713-3724. [https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b04417](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b04417).*)
- Aside from pulmonary and cardiovascular diseases, exposure to PM2.5 can lead to increased risk of dementia (*Kriit, H.K., Forsberg, B., Åstro ̈m, D.O., Oudin, A., 2021. Annual dementia incidence and monetary burden attributable to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) exposure in Sweden. Environ Health 20, 65. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-021-00750-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-021-00750-x).*) and may increase the risk of developing type 2 diabetes (*Liu, C., Wang, B., Liu, S., Li, S., Zhang, K., Luo, B., Yang, A., 2021. Type 2 diabetes attributable to PM2.5: A global burden study from 1990 to 2019. Environ. Int. 156, 106725. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106725](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106725).*).
- he electrification of public utility vehicles also has the potential to decrease greenhouse gas emissions by 85 % from 14.98 21.23 Mt CO2 eq/year to 2.23–––3.13 Mt CO2 eq/year, decrease particulate matter, nitrous oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), and CO emissions by 96 %, 82 %, 59 %, and 93 %, respectively (*[Agaton, C.B., Collera, A.A., Guno, C.S., 2020. Socio-economic and environmental analyses of sustainable public transport in the Philippines. Sustainability 12 (11), 4720](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2213-624X\(25\)00006-9/h0010).; Guno, C.S., Collera, A.A., Agaton, C.B., 2021. Barriers and drivers of transition to sustainable public transport in the Philippines. World Electric Vehicle J. 12 (1), 1–22. [https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj12010046](https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj12010046).*).
- The shift has been hindered by financial and technological factors such as the high cost of electrification, issues in the driving range and operation of EVs in different terrains, the lack of charging infrastructure, and the availability of auto parts, mechanics, and stores needed for repairs (Guno et al., 2021).
# Kecorius et al., 2017
- Here, the inefficient public transport system and the rapid increase of vehicular fleet resulted in congested streets being filled with private cars, taxis, old buses and public utility Jeepneys (PUJs)
- Equipped with pre-EURO diesel engines, PUJs emit high concentration of combustion generated aerosol particles, which in turn became a dominant aerosol in the urban atmosphere. The emission inventories reported that traffic-related sources are responsible for more than 71% of the total country's particulate matter emission in the Philippines (Vergel and Tiglao, 2013). In the National Capital Region (NCR), the local Department of Environment and Natural Resources report that 90% of emissions can be attributed to mobile sources
- The important message from the EFs analysis is that old technology diesel PUJs, being only 20% of total vehicular fleet, contribute up to 75 and 94% of total roadside emitted refractory particle number and soot mass, respectively. It is also worth mentioning that PUJs, not like heavy duty vehicles, do not encounter traffic bans and are able to drive streets of Metro Manila with no restrictions regarding environmental protection.
- From here, it can be seen that PUJs emit 11.7 times more particle in terms of number and 61.3 times more particles in terms of mass when compared to LDVs
- Comparing these values to the European Union (EU) emission standards, it is clear that the particle number emission from PUJs in Metro Manila exceeds Euro 6 target value of 6.0,1011 particles/(km * veh) (6.0,1012 particles/(km * veh)  within the first three years from Euro 6 effective dates) by up to 2000 times.
- The Philippine ambient air quality guidelines set by the Clean Air Act, in terms of particulate matter, control only the levels of PM10. This criteria pollutant was shown to be below national guidelines and almost within the World Health Organization (WHO) 24-h limit (Zhu et al., 2012). There might be several reasons for relatively low PM10 mass concentration in Metro Manila when compared to other megacities.
- For example, the Philippine Archipelago is unlikely to be affected by dust and sandstorms from remotely located deserts. Coastal location (enhanced dispersion), warm climate (no seasonal heating), low secondary aerosol production and high annual precipitation (particulate removal) may also substantially lower ambient PM10 concentrations (Oanh et al., 2006).
- To address the air pollution problem, ambient air quality guidelines were set by the Philippine Clean Air Act (CAA) on 23 June 1999
- This legislation covered limits for ambient levels of major air pollutants, including PM10. Short-term (24-hr) and long-term  (annual) averages of PM10 of 150 and 60 mg/m3, respectively, were set as National Ambient Air Quality Guideline Values (NAAQGV). Until recently, the PM2.5 has been also included in NAAQGV, with  short-term and long-term guidelines of 50 and 25 mg/m3, respectively, as of January 2016.
- On the other hand, PM2.5 concentrations that are measured since 2001, but not regulated until 2013, were reported to regularly exceed WHO limits (Zhu et al., 2012). This was also confirmed by our measurements
- However, in our case this is only partly equitable, mainly because of the presence of the smallest (10-20 nm) refractory particles.
# Balanay & Lungu, 2009
- Laws such as the Philippine Clean Air Act of 1999, that regulate air pollution cover criteria pollutants. However, VOCs (toluene, benzene, m,p-xylene, o-xylene and ethylbenzene) remains unregulated and are rarely monitored in the Philippines.
- Because a jeepney is semi-enclosed, the driver and passengers of jeepneys may be easily exposed to urban pollution and, therefore, are at risk to health effects caused by pollutants, such as VOCs. But, unlike the passengers and other commuters, the jeepney drivers spend more than one half of the day working in the vehicle, thus being an occupational hazard.
- This study showed that the in-vehicle concentrations of the selected VOCs were significantly higher (2–5 times higher) than the ambient VOC concentrations in Manila.
- Based on these consistent findings, the vehicle interior appears to be an important microenvironment for VOC exposure. Proximity to the exhaust from vehicles in the traffic and exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) in a semi-enclosed environment is likely to be an important factor in the differences found between in-vehicle and ambient VOC concentrations.
- Toluene@196.6 µg/m³ - colorless liquid chemical found in gasoline and used as a solvent. Short-term effects include dizziness, headaches, and impaired coordination. Long-term occupational exposure is linked to neurological damage and reproductive harm. Group 3 in IARC carcinogenicity (International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). ‘Re-evaluation of some organic chemicals, hydrazine and hydrogen peroxide’ IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans 1999: volume 71) 
- o-Xylene@88.5 µg/m³ - xylene derivative, a chemical derived from petroleum and coal tar. Primarily affects the central nervous system with symptoms like dizziness, nausea, and irritation of the respiratory tract. Unclassifiable in IARC carcinogenicity
- m,p-Xylene — 72.5 µg/m³ - Another form of xylene, with essentially the same sources and health effects as o-xylene. The two are often measured together because they are difficult to separate analytically. Unclassifiable in IARC carcinogenicity
- Benzene@55.6 µg/m³ - crude oil component and a direct byproduct of combustion engines. Classified as Group 1 carcinogen by IARC. There is no safe level of exposure.
- Ethylbenzene@17.9 µg/m³ - petroleum-derived chemical used primarily in the production of styrene. Causes irritation of the eyes, skin, and respiratory tract at high concentrations. IARC classifies it as a Group 2B carcinogen, possibly carcinogenic to humans, though evidence is not yet conclusive.

# Biona, 2017
- These vehicles have been implicated as a major source of air pollution in the country, particularly in major urban areas such as Metro Manila. As these jeepneys are normally powered by old and dilapidated diesel engines, they produce pollutants that directly impact the health of citizens, such as particulate matter (PM), Carbon monoxide (CO), oxides of Nitrogen (NOx), Sulphur oxides (SOx) and climate relevant pollutants such as Carbon dioxide (CO2). Air pollution is considered a “silent killer”, and its damage to people’s health is estimated at USD $2.5 billion or about 1.55% of the Philippines’ gross domestic product (GDP) in 2009. (World Bank, 2009, Philippines – Country Environmental Analysis, Washington, DC.)
- Particulate matter pollution is a growing concern since the monitoring of ambient PM10 and PM2.5 in Metro Manila indicates population-weighted averages of 72 μg/m3 and 48 μg/m, respectively, which are higher than the guidelines set by the World Health Organization of 20 μg/m3 for PM10 and 10 μg/m3 for PM2.5 (WHO, 2005). ==UPDATE==
- The air pollution caused by the jeepneys is due to a variety of factors related to their technologies, driver behavior, vehicle maintenance, and others such as levels of congestion.
## Causes
- The frequent loading and unloading in the middle of the streets, low cruising speeds, long idle times while waiting for passengers, excessive lane changing and high acceleration rates of jeepneys significantly contribute in defining their fuel consumption and emissions. This also increases the fuel consumption and emissions of other vehicles.
- The nature of their operation (unrestricted picking up and dropping off of passengers and high competition among themselves) contribute to traffic congestion. The poor enforcement of traffic rules and regulations further aggravates the situation.
- The jeepneys are mostly fitted with imported second-hand Japanese engines. The Isuzu C190, C240 and Mitsubishi 4DR5 power most of the jeepneys built in the ‘80s, while the newer versions are mostly built with Isuzu 4BC2, 4BA1 and 4BE1 engines to accommodate larger passenger capacity. These engines are based on the naturally aspirated indirect injection platform which is known to have significantly higher emissions than modern diesel technologies.
- The main maintenance and servicing concerns, such as improper injection system calibration, improper overhauling, wheel misalignment and poor tire balance, and use of low quality lubrication oils, are often practiced by the sector.
- Jeepney operators and drivers often prefer to have calibrations done in non-certified calibration shops due to cost considerations. The reliability of the equipment, as well as the skills of the mechanics, in these non-certified shops is uncertain.
- Some operators would have their injectors configured so they will pump in more fuel than recommended in order to generate higher power. This is a more common practice in cases of jeepneys with smaller engines, such as Isuzu 4BA-1, and Mitsubishi C190 and C240. Unfortunately, such a practice affects the efficiency of the engine and increases its emissions.
- General engine overhauling is avoided by operators whenever possible to temporarily save money.
- Whenever loose compression (Mainly caused by the wear and tear of the piston. Loose compression leads to losses in efficiencies and an increase in emissions.) is experienced, jeepney operators normally resort to a servicing technique more commonly known as “dukot”.
- This technique allows the removal, cleaning and replacement of key engine components without the need to remove the engine from the vehicle. While this technique is a lot cheaper, its results are not comparable to a proper overhauling process. Some operators and mechanics resort to oversizing piston rings for tighter clearance between the piston and cylinder walls to address loose compression conditions. General and proper overhauling of the engine is seldom done and is implemented only as a last resort, again, due to cost considerations.
- Misaligned and unbalanced wheels are major sources of energy losses in vehicles.
- In addition, most operators prefer to use lower quality engines oils and tend to lengthen oil-change intervals for cost-cutting purposes.
- Basic repair and maintenance is done by the drivers and operators themselves. Most of the drivers, operators and jeepney mechanics have not undergone formal auto mechanic schooling and learned their trade on the job. Many of them start out as helpers, learning the trade over the years and eventually doing the work themselves. This has contributed to the proliferation of improper vehicle operation and maintenance concepts.
- a large portion of jeepney owners own only one unit, further presenting constraints on the proper operation and maintenance of the vehicles, providing no immediate opportunities to save costs through economies of scale. The situation prompts these owners to operate the vehicles continuously to provide daily income for the owner and delay the build-up of funds for major maintenance and corrective work due to limited financial returns.
- It is a common misconception that the thermostat should be removed to enable the continuous flow of coolant. The removal of the thermostat leads to the continuous operation of the water pump, which is an additional load for the engine and can prevent the engine from attaining its ideal working temperature. There is also a common practice of replacing radiators with higher capacity ones, which results in the non-attainment of the optimal engine temperature and can lead to misfires and incomplete fuel combustion.
- Engine air filters are also often removed or replaced with more porous versions to allow greater air flow. These porous ones, however, could accelerate engine degradation due to improper filtration of air contaminants. In addition, it may also affect engine performance due to variations in pressure values in the air inlet system relative to the design settings. Proper sealing of fuel inlet caps is also often taken for granted and contributes to evaporative emissions.