# Environment
## Gotangco et al., 2025
- Jeepney drivers are not considered as regular employees and do not receive mandated government benefits – they earn revenues coming directly from passengers and practice a degree of flexibility within the jeepney drivers’ associations they belong to set their working hours.
- Drivers’ expenditures therefore include vehicle rental (boundary), as well as diesel and other terminal fees. This jeepney system has many detrimental aspects it aggravates traffic congestion, consumes fuel inefficiently, contributes to the degradation of air quality, and poses major safety and health hazards (Mateo-Babiano et al., 2020)
# Beltran et al., 2024
- Due to their convenience, comfort, and simplified usage, jeepneys remain an ordinary means of transportation for many commuters and play a significant part in the lives of Filipinos. 
- Even with the fair fee and the earnings they make after a long and exhausting drive, their salaries are still insufficient (Frisnedi et al., 2021). 
- Additionally, jeepney drivers encounter a variety of difficulties; among these include the long hours at work and fatigue they experience in high traffic (Ranis et al., 2021). In view of this, some drivers are compelled to drive irresponsibly in traffic jams, which can worsen the condition of the road and occasionally may result in an accident. 
- Furthermore, maintaining the general health of jeepney drivers while driving is significantly influenced by their working circumstances. Owing to the nature of their jobs, spending a lot of time confined to one place might be stressful (Seva, 2023). 
- Furthermore, as noted by Balansag (2019), area management and construction projects frequently turn into significant obstacles, resulting in route closures and compelling jeepney drivers to take longer, alternate routes in order to avoid traffic. This can occasionally result in a standstill situation where jeepneys congest on the narrow road.
- As a result, according to Renis et al. (2021), issues at work including long hours, low salary, along with worsening circumstances like traffic, cramped workspaces, and protracted road construction, could cause them stressed out and impede them from making the most of their own driving skills.
- According to Cañada etal., (2021), physical or internal abatement that redounds in fatigue could produce dropped alertness, poor judgment, and slower response times, serving as a vital factor that supported parlous driving practices. multitudinous causes, including lack of sleep, lengthy workdays, and stress, contributed to fatigue.
- The theme Perception and Experiences of Jeepney Drivers, shows the numerous factors that contribute to the daily lives of the Jeepney Drivers such as their perspectives, work struggles, and experiences while on the road. The results revealed that each participant that was interviewed shared common problems and showed how the affected their everyday live just like how a participant expresses his dismay. Traffic problems affect their income because whenever they’re stuck in traffic, their time is being wasted and it greatly affects their rotation, which would also mean that their income would not be enough. 
	- Economic Struggles in the Jeepney Profession showed that jeepney drivers have a significant problem with the economy including the rising prices of fuel and food and unpredictable income, as their income only comes from how many commuters ride their Jeepneys. Due to this, the participants stated the difficulty in maintaining their vehicles due to high maintenance costs and the little income they receive from driving Jeepneys. thus, contributing to their financial strain. 
	- In Interactions Between Drivers and Passengers, the participants shared their interaction experiences with the passengers and other drivers. The result revealed that some passengers were understanding and kind; the other passengers were perceived as demanding and occasionally rude. However, many of the Jeepney drivers endure this and instead are patient with these kinds of passengers. 
	- Work Struggles Experienced on the Road indicated that participants also have struggles they experience on the roads while driving. The findings indicated that constant traffic, road construction, and congestion affect many aspects of their work, particularly their income and daily quotas.
- The theme, Key Factors that Influenced the Decision Making of Jeepney Drivers serves as an entire focus that explores the various factors that influenced the decision and navigational behavior of the Jeepney drivers.
	- While the subtheme Impacts of Road Conditions to Jeepney Drivers revealed that road conditions while driving their vehicle have a high influence on their driving decisions, while navigating the roads, the participants asserted that many of the drivers need to adapt and change their driving strategies in response to congested streets, particularly the cramped and uneven roads. 
	- Driver and Commuters Safety on Road showed that safety for both the driver and the passengers is also integral whenever they maneuver their jeepneys. Thus, participants adhere to many regulations to promote a safe way of driving. This also includes following traffic regulations, maintaining a good condition of their Jeepney, and different protocols that ensure that there will be no accidents or any risk for everyone.
- The theme Jeepney Driver’s Act in Accordance with the Intervention Regarding Transportation Policy revealed several aspects of how a Jeepney Driver adapts and responds to the changes due to transportation policy
	- In Impact of Intervention to their Livelihood and the Financial consequences, the participants imply that intervention policies affect the economic sustainability of Jeepney drivers due to policy changes. thus, affecting their income as well.
	- Labored Experiences of Jeepney Driver’s in Working Setting delves into the experiences of the Jeepney drivers in their work setting. The result finds that the daily challenges of driving cause physical and emotional exhaustion for the participants due to the challenges in their work environment
	- Effect of Strategies and the Way They Adapt to the Possible Difficulties explores the resilience and patience of the jeepney drivers despite the numerous challenges and difficulties they experience. For this reason, many participants stated that they employed different strategies to cope with and adapt to these difficulties, which shows the drivers’ ability to navigate through the challenges and find a safe solution.


# Baltazar et al., 2024
- The participants experienced debts, fuel changes and competition among jeepney drivers. They relied on their income to pay for their debts. The result presents that most informants are in debt due to insufficient income, which is heavily influenced by changes in fuel prices and competition in the transportation industry. Competition in getting passengers greatly influenced their daily income. The number of jeepney driver passengers was affected by competition with other modes of land transportation. This hinders them from reaching their target income, affecting their ability to sustain their needs
- They try to overtake each other to reach waiting for passengers first, which can, unfortunately, cause roadway accidents. They drive recklessly and illegally within their designated lanes to get over their competition. They are aware of this but are forced to do it; otherwise, they would profit less. In addition, fuel price changes contribute to the financial difficulties drivers face
- Drivers consider misunderstandings with their passengers a regular thing in their day-to-day work. This misunderstanding between drivers and passengers could escalate to physical and verbal violence.
- Disagreements between bus drivers and passengers commonly arise in specific situations, such as passengers wanting to alight at undesignated stops, dissatisfaction with the driver's demeanour, disputes during fare payment, delays in boarding, congestion at the doors, obstruction of bus routes, and passengers engaging in behaviors like eating, smoking, or spitting, as well as littering or causing damage to the interior environment of the vehicle [Anund, A., & Ihlstrom, J., 2022. Threats and violence towards urban bus drivers in Sweden': Drivers experiences and general recommendations to prevent violence and threats. Work-A Journal of Prevention Assessment & Rehabilitation, 72 (4), 1279-1287.; Zhang, N., Cheng, P., Ning, P., Schwebel, D. C., & Hu, G. (2022). Conflicts between bus drivers 742 and passengers in Changsha, China. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 169, 106623.].
- Every driver has different approaches to maximizing their profits and meeting their daily quotas. While some drivers are willing to take more turns, others focus on saving fuel and maintenance costs by driving moderately. However, engaging in unethical practices, such as purchasing fuel from unauthorized sources such as buying in bulk or in small amounts from large trucks, has negative consequences. An informant shared his experiences in fuel-saving methods practised by other drivers. “Other drivers resort to this to save money compared to buying from gasoline stations. I do not engage in that; I prefer fuel from gasoline stations. They say there are disadvantages to that method, like the fuel being dirty or mixed with water, but they do save more”
# Coz et al., 2015
- Regular driver works at an average of 10.14 hours each day, 4 to 5 days within a week.
- They are all contented with the tolerable state of their workspace. The drivers are satisfied even if they are restricted to a small leg room, and/or they have to bend just to see the traffic light. However, they all confirm that body ache and other discomfort are expected after each working day. The drivers just choose to ignore these problems simply because there will be monetary costs in solving these problems and because they have grown accustomed to these conditions
- Jeepney drivers typically don't have head rests and seat cushions, and even if they do, the driver’s seat back rest height is still inadequate. Together with the lack of proper inclination, the driver is forced to maintain an awkward posture while driving.

# Nolasco et al., 2014
- Kotongan refers to the payment of bribe, called kotong, areglo or grease money, by public transport drivers to the state authorities (for example, police, traffic managers and local government personnel) that's widely reported in local media. It fits the context of the study given that it is a phenomenon occurring beyond or outside the physical set-up of state organizations, specifically in major thoroughfares of the country.
- The stress placed on corruption as being situated in the locus of public and private offices automatically classifies it as an organizational phenomenon. The use of lines of power and authority by perpetrators and their complicit, part or not of the perpetrator’s organization, defines the boundary of discourse of organizational corruption (for example, Aguilera, R.V., & Vadera, A.K. (2008). The dark side of authority: Antecedents, mechanisms, and outcomes of organizational corruption. Journal of Business Ethics, 77(4), 431–449.; Burke, Edward, Tomlinson, C., & Cooper, Cary L. (2011). Crime and corruption in organizations: Why it occurs and what to do about it. Surrey, England: Gower Publishing, Ltd.; Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R.W. (1993). Corruption. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 599–617. Retrieved on 12 October 2013 from [http://qje. oxfordjournals.org/content/108/3/599.short](http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/content/108/3/599.short)). Usually, the organizational corruption is viewed as a deliberate action involving connivance of mutually agreeing parties.
- In the case of principal agent theory, corruption is the ‘agent’s departure from principal’s demand for responsible use of power’ (Moratalla, Nelson (1999). Graft and corruption: The Philippine experience. Retrieved on 13 October 2013 from unpan1.un.org/intradoc/.../unpan 019122.pdf). Here, the factor of motivation plays an important role of cementing party connections, influence and command over money or power of those affected by corruption (for example, Reyes Jr, Vicente. (2009). Corruption and implementation: Case studies in Philippine public administration. Quezon City, Philippines: University of the Philippines, Diliman, National College of Public Administration and Governance, and Philippine Australia Human Resource Development Facility.
- the perspective of transactions theory looks at corruption as a situation when entities expect mutual gains from enforcing corruption that greases the wheels of state bureaucracy (Kauffman, D., & Wei, S.J. (1999). Does “Grease Money” speed up the wheels of commerce? Policy Research Working Paper. Washington D.C, USA: World Bank.).
- the culture perspective, especially applied in the Philippine context, views corruption as resulting from the conflict of law with culture (Tapales, 1995, in Moratalla, Nelson (1999). Graft and corruption: The Philippine experience. Retrieved on 13 October 2013 from unpan1.un.org/intradoc/.../unpan 019122.pdf). This means that laws, including rules and regulations, being universal and rational, find themselves incompatible with societal norms, which strongly demand cooperation, strong familial or kinship ties and regard for others (Bautista, 1985, in MoratallaMoratalla, Nelson (1999). Graft and corruption: Similar to the observation of Easterly (2001), these three perspectives do not preclude the possibility of corruption transpiring covertly or systematically (institutionalized on a grand scale). But all of them underscore the formal context of organizational corruption and less attention is paid the informal complexities of organizational corruption. This point is worth noting since corruption in the Philippines manifests as concerns stemming from the following organizational dysfunctions that transgress the legal institutions and other formal state arrangements: bribery, funds embezzlement, influence peddling, nepotism and pilferage (for example, Chua, Yvonne. (1999). Robbed: An investigation of corruption in Philippine education. Quezon City, Philippines: Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism.; Girling, J., & Girling, J.L.S. (1997). Corruption, capitalism and democracy. London, UK: Routledge.; Reyes Jr, Vicente. (2009). Corruption and implementation: Case studies in Philippine public administration. Quezon City, Philippines: University of the Philippines, Diliman, National College of Public Administration and Governance, and Philippine Australia Human Resource Development Facility.; World Bank, 2001).The Philippine experience. Retrieved on 13 October 2013 from unpan1.un.org/intradoc/.../unpan 019122.pdf)
- As for jeepney drivers, each of them earned a daily gross income ranging between 2,000 pesos (US$ 44) and 3,500 pesos (US$ 78). They normally spent 500–800 pesos (US$ 11–17) for the boundary (payment given to the operators for the daily use of registered vehicles) and 700–1,200 pesos (US$ 16–27) for the consumption of crude oil. This left them with a disposable income in the range of 800–1,500 pesos (US$ 17–33)
- Corruption straddles the continuum of communication processes that begins with individual revelation of preferences for bribery by state authorities and drivers, and progresses to negotiation of terms and agreement to enforce bribery.
- Paralleling the communication continuum, the motivation of drivers changes from the pursuit of financial and practical ends to the pursuit of the meld of financial, personal, practical and service-oriented ends. This means that drivers had become more reflective of the perils and risks as well as benefits associated with ground-level enforcement of bribery. The ethical concern in decision making of drivers is finding the balance between practicality and concern for the welfare of family, passengers and self.
- In the last two communication processes, their connections played significant role in intimidating and creating anxiety among drivers. Even connections of drivers can hardly mediate in the process. Thus, drivers face restricted decision-making options—through compulsion or voluntary enforcement of bribery in favour of the demands of state authorities.
- Drivers are left with the valuation criterion: complying or registering unity with the state authorities. The organizational context of street-based corruption is restored by the involvement of the connections of state authorities from state institutions or by hindering the processes of state institutions from rectifying street-based corruption.
# Seva et al., 2011
- Jeepney drivers in Metro Manila were likely to suffer from musculoskeletal discomfort, due to the poor design of their workspace and the system used for fare collection

# Values
## Adovas et al., 2024
- “Bahala na” is religious in nature. The study of Hong (*Hong, Y. (2020). Powerlessness and a social imaginary in the Philippines: A case study on Bahala na. The Asbury Journal, 75(1), 9. Retrieved from: [https://dx.doi.org/](https://dx.doi.org/10.7252/Journal.01.20)[10.7252/Journal.01.20](https://doi.org/10.7252%2FJournal.01.20) 20S.08. Lagmay, A.V. (1993). Bahaha Na!. Retrieved from [https://www.scribd.com/document/72921](https://www.scribd.com/document/72921) 9895/Lagmay-1993*) emphasizes that Bahala na is deeply rooted in Filipino cosmological belief or spirituality, which was influenced by Animism, Hinduism, Islam, and Christianity. 
- In Animism, the study of De Mesa (*De Santos, J. (2023). PhilStar. UP paper: Jeepney 'modernization' risks corporate takeover of transport sector. Retrieved from [https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2023 /04/02/2256307/paper-jeepney-moderni](https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2023/04/02/2256307/paper-jeepney-moderni) zation-must-be-participative-recognize-tr ansport-public-good*) cited from Garcia & Mananzanan (*“In Animism, the study of Casiño (2015) and De Mesa (1979) cited from Garcia & Mananzanan (2024) states that bahala na is influenced by the animistic spirituality of ancient Filipinos. It pertains to a belief that there are spirits in nature that have some control over fate and” (Adovas et al., 2024, p. 4)*) states that bahala na is influenced by the animistic spirituality of ancient Filipinos. It pertains to a belief that there are spirits in nature that have some control over fate and can bring both positive and negative things into an individual’s life.
- In terms of Hinduism, the study of Bostrom (1968) and Jocano (1981) cited from Hong (2020), supported these findings by tracing the roots of Bahala na to the term "Bathala,” referring to "God,” the highest deity. In this sense, Bahala na reasonably has a religious origin in its usage. For this reason, the term Bahala na is thought to derive from the “Si Bathala Na” phrase, which means "Leave it to God." 
- In view of Christianity, Bahala na is regarded as “Thy Will Be Done” in their prayers (Hong, 2020). These religious influences have allowed Filipino people to adopt “Bahala na” as a cultural coping mechanism, relying on their religious convictions to navigate life uncertainties.
- In a review of Sikolohiyang Pilipino (Filipino Psychology): A Legacy of Virgilio G. Enriquez (p. 55), Pe-Pua and Protacio-Marcelino(2000) illustrated Enriquez’s critical approach to studying Filipino values. It was mentioned that the Filipino cultural values of Bahala na have no translation in the universal language. Hence, Bahala na (“determination”) was classified under confrontative surface values along with sama/lakas ng loob (‘‘resentment/guts’’) and pakikibaka (‘‘resistance’’). The term Bahala na encapsulates a uniquely Filipino form of resilience and determination in the face of uncertainty. Unlike a simple translation of "leave it to fate," Bahala na conveys an active engagement with challenges, showcasing the Filipino spirit of confronting difficulties head-on. 
- This classification, along with sama/lakas ng loob and pakikibaka, underscores a proactive stance in Filipino psychology, reflecting a cultural resilience and a fighting spirit essential for overcoming socio-economic and personal hurdles 
- Bahala na represents an active, almost defiant determination to face whatever comes.
- Thomas Andres (1994), who published the Dictionary of Filipino Culture Values, has defined Bahala na as a Filipino attitude that enables one to accept sufferings and dilemmas, leaving everything up to the supreme being, and the supreme being will take over the uncontrolled situation. In this essence, Bahala na reflects a cultural resilience where faith in a higher power helps individuals cope with challenges beyond their control. According to the literature, this attitude is not merely about resignation but about finding strength and calm in the belief that the supreme being will guide them through hardships. 
- Likewise, Tolentino et al. (2023) highlights the three indigenous concepts from Sikolohiyang Pilipino such as kapwa, pakikibaka, and bahala na that were used to analyze the emotion-focused coping of Filipino-Americans with Type 2 diabetes during COVID-19. Bahala na along with pakikibaka was evident on how the participants cope with their emotions. Bahala na reflects a reliance on faith and acceptance of uncertainty, trusting that outcomes are in the hands of a higher power or fate. It's a form of resilience, allowing individuals to face challenges with a sense of surrender and confidence in their ability to endure.
- In Filipino Psychology, Lagmay (1993) stated that Bahala na is a positive, functional response to uncertainty within the culture. As Lagmay (1993) conducted a thematic apperception analysis of bahala-na-situation stories, he found that Bahala na reveals character values that signify a basic psychological ascendancy in Filipinos—demonstrating determination, resilience, and proactive behavior rather than submission, surrender, retreat, or cessation of effort.
- Another study highlights the financial struggles that jeepney drivers face in the modernization program, which leads to their negative perceptions of the program due to its high costs (Atos, M. S. Q. et al., 2024).
- As stated in the study of Landayan, S. A., et al (2024), the estimated daily income of the majority of the Jeepney Drivers ranges from 500-2000 pesos, which is mostly spent on their daily needs such as foods, bills payment, and others which lead to their income becoming insufficient to sustain their daily necessities. In terms of their access to social services, Jeepney Drivers also have the same access to any social services just like the rest of the working Filipino-employees. However, despite having such access to social services, they also struggle to access some of the social services such as access to healthcare, given that their income is not sufficient enough to cover their daily needs.
## Güss & Tuason, 2008
- Filipino values can be characterized as high collectivism (preference for acting as group members rather than as individuals), very high power distance (degree of acceptance of inequality), low uncertainty avoidance (preference for unstructured rather than structured situations), high masculinity (preference for values such as assertiveness and performance over those of warm personal relationships and service), and high short-term orientation (opposite of a long-term time orientation that stresses Confucian values like persistence).
## Javidan & House, 2001; Smith et al., 2002; Inglehart and Baker, 2000; Enriquez, 1977; Paredes, 1996, as cited in Güss & Tuason, 2008
- Javidan & House (2001) characterized the Philippines as very high on humane orientation, meaning that Filipinos try to avoid conflict in conversations and are caring and supportive.\
- Smith et al. (2002) combined data from several value surveys and characterized Filipinos as high in power distance and conservatism, i.e., showing preference for the immediate circle over outsiders, maintaining the status quo, and loyalty towards one’s boss.
- Similarly, Inglehart and Baker (2000), in a study of 65 countries, characterized individuals from the Philippines as having high traditional (religion, national pride, and obedience to authority) and survival (economic and physical security) values 
- For Enriquez, the Filipino self is not an independent unity, but an interconnected unity with the selves of others or with the kapwa (the other). Thus, the Western concept of collectivism only captures a small aspect of kapwa. Among the more frequently mentioned values according to Enriquez (1977) were pakikisama (favoring smooth interpersonal relations), utang na loob (honoring debt of gratitude), and bahala na (determination in the face of uncertainty).
- Paredes (1996) mentioned utang kabubut-ón (debt of gratitude), pakikisama (camaraderie), and hiya (shame). 

# *Bahala Na*
## Pe-Pua & Protacio-Marcelino, 2000
- There is a certain sense of readiness to face the challenges of everyday life, which is related to the Filipino value of bahala na 
## Güss & Tuason, 2008
- When Filipinos say bahala na, it indicates a feeling that they can do their best when crises arise and a confidence in their ability to handle whatever form problems take. 

# Lamangan (one-upmanship)
##  Menez, 1998
- Refers to the strategy for besting one’s opponent in any kind of contest. However, to the jeepney driver, it is a game which governs not only his driving behavior but also his pursuit of the good life.
- Driving is also an economic competition, for the driver’s daily income depends upon the number of passengers he can transport to their destinations. He weaves in and out of traffic, his eyes alternately on the road, on the look-out for potential customers, and on his passengers getting on or off his vehicle; with one hand on the wheel, the other collecting fares and handing out change, and intermittently wiping off his sweat with a rag tied around his neck, the jeepney driver is indeed the highly pressured urbanite in the marketplace of city streets. As one driver wrote on his jeep, “Jingle” lang ang pahinga [We rest only when we piss].
- The use of elegant titles is another manifestation of the competition for social status. Such jeepney names as “Jeepney King II,” “Road Emperor,” “Jason the King,” “Prince William,” and “Denis D’Great” state the drivers’ playful attempts to affiliate with royalty. If one is a “Millionaire Forever,” the other is a “Socialite Forever.” Even such signs as Solong Anak [Only Child] and Heredero [Heir] express some form of social one-upmanship. They refer to the special treatment accorded an only child or a sole heir who never had to do without the basic necessities of life. Laki sa Layaw: Jeeprox (Raised in Luxury: Jeeprox] is a variant of the refrain from a popular song “Jeprocks” [Projects] about the self-indulgent children of suburbia. Like the elegant titles above, these allusions to a privileged childhood are the driver’s fantasy. 
- Jeepney drivers, however, have a different interpretation. One gave this typical explanation: “A jeepney is just like a woman who loves beautiful clothes. If we do well we dress her up.” This analogy is also found in such inscriptions as “A jeepney without a driver is like a woman without a lover,” and its recent variant, “A chick without a lover is like a Mazda without a stereo.”
- This intimate identification with the vehicle as an extension of the driver’s personality emphasizes the jeepney’s function as a status symbol. As another driver pointed out, “If the driver is prosperous, so is his jeep.” The quantity and quality of decorative objects provide a gauge of the driver’s economic status. A jeep with six or eight chrome statuettes of Pegasus is deemed superior to one with only two or three chrome horses. One-upmanship is the name of the game.
## Stone, 1973, as cited in Menez, 1998
- To the jeepney driver, one-upmanship pertains primarily to the acquisition of road space. Driving is a constant competition for space, with each driver bent on edging out his competitors to avoid being obstructed

# Religion
## Quilantang, 2024
- Religious figures such as the Sacred Heart of Jesus, the Virgin Mary, and other saints grace many jeepneys, reflecting the strong religious fabric that undergirds the Filipino society (Blanton; Olivares). An essential component of jeepney decorations is inscribing Bible verses on different vehicle parts.
- Much inscriptions bear testament to the deep religious faith permeating the Filipino society. These verses, often chosen personally by the drivers or owners, are considered sources of inspiration, guidance, and protection during their daily journeys. Using these symbols signals the significance of Catholicism in the Philippines, a heritage of Spanish colonisation. It indicates how deeply ingrained these religious beliefs are in the daily life and public spaces of Filipinos. These symbols do not merely represent abstract religious concepts but actively shape the behaviours and interactions of the drivers. For instance, a driver may feel a sense of divine protection and moral guidance when driving a jeepney adorned with religious icons, influencing their behaviour on the road.
- Ultimately, the religious icons on jeepneys extend beyond their immediate religious meanings. These symbols illustrate how faith, identity, and public life are interconnected in the Filipino context.
## Parrucho, 2023
- The second sub-theme features the inside and outside of a Jeepney as a venue for religious expression. As stated by participants, religious icons, rosary beads, and daily prayer were among the specific ways of expressing faith observed during the rides. Based on the data collected, the dashboard is frequently used as a miniature altar space.
- Filipino society has a strong religious faith (Canete, 2021). According to the responses of the participants, Jeepney demonstrates that Filipinos still believe in superstition and have a strong faith in God. Basedon the findings of Güss and Tuason's (2008) study, the Manila Jeepney had more religious decorations and accessories. According to the 2020 census of population and housing, 78.8% of Filipinos are Roman Catholics, which explains why most designs and arts reflected in Jeepneys are Catholic symbols and names. Mercado (1994) revealed that the front of the driver typically has a small altar with a rosary, a small statue/picture of the Blessed Virgin, Santo Ñino, Sacred Heart, or a crucifix. This is a sort of roadside protection, as well as a daily prayer for a dream or the success of the family. Thus, according to Blanton (2015), the Jeepney is an important representation vehicle in the religious life of the country.
## Blanton, 2015
- The Jeepney is not only the dominant mode of public transportation in Manila, but a crucial representational vehicle in the religious life of the city. Since at least the  early 1950s, the exterior of the Jeepney has been an important site of Filipino folk  art, featuring symbols of speed and masculinity such as abstract representations of  rooster wings creatively “split” around the exterior panels of the vehicle folk art coincided with new charismatic Christian and evangelical religious movements that packed large coliseums and enlivened new communities of collective effervescence in Manila in the mid 1980s. Directly coincident with these new religious  movements, the metallic surface of the Jeepney became filled with brightly colored  spray paint lettering proclaiming pious slogans such as “Praise the Lord!” “Prayer  Warrior” and “Power of Prayer”. Likewise, these movements signaled  an increasing orientation of the Jeepneys’ exterior space of visual representation  around the themes of the Virgin Mary [Roman Catholic], biblical characters, and prayer [predominantly evangelical and charismatic Christian]. 
- These mobile Marian apparitions reflect the shrines located just to the side of  the road in residential neighborhoods throughout Manila. Many of these shrines display a ceramic statue of Mary adorned with silk flowers and surrounded by the residual traces of wax from the burning of votive candles. From her  niche of cobblestone and mortar, Mary casts a plangent gaze toward the crossroads.
- At night her shrine is anointed by the sallow luminescence of a soot-stained light  bulb: a sacred beacon on streets prone to accident, contingency and breakdown.  
- As vehicle of religious representation, the Jeepney marks the proliferation of pious  visual culture within urban public space. Through the mobile surfaces of the Jeepney,  the presence of pious imagery has transitioned from the private devotional shrine  of the domestic interior and the candlelit space of the Cathedral and, quite literally,  taken to the street. As an apparatus of mobile piety, the Jeepney takes the annual Festival procession of the Saints and plunges this pious imagery into the vibrant  circulation of everyday life.
- This urban transit research describes how these new forms of pious imagery are  not merely a passive reflection of religious movements occurring around them in the  spaces of churches, cathedrals and public coliseums; rather, these vibrant images themselves actively refashion the urban landscape into an enchanted mobile network  of miraculous Marian apparitions, fervent communal prayer, and pious exhortations.  In this way, the infrastructure of public transportation becomes an apparatus of  urban belief, mapping the grid and the informal economies of everyday life that take  place upon its asphalt surface with sacred visions shrouded in delicate plumes of dust  and diesel fumes.
- In terms of infrastructure and materiality, the Jeepney is not only a ‘vehicle’ of  representation, but the form of the technology itself is ‘quickened’ or actuated by the  force of religious community and the experience of sacred presence. For an example  of the way religion is fabricated into the very materiality of the infrastructure, we  could take the flying dove, a symbol of the immanent power of the Holy Spirit in the  Christian tradition – descending through the polished steel surface of a Jeepney side panel
- In this instance, religious representation and instrumental function become indistinguishable within the shimmering form of “stainless” steel. Thus the idea of divine communication and the miraculous traffic between the sacred and the everyday has  become so sedimented within the history of the Jeepney that it is now “fabricated”  into the structure of the machine in the independent manufacturing and assembly  garages located around the city. This “stainless” steel suggests a promising method to  describe and theorize urban infrastructure in many developing countries, not merely  as an assemblage of bureaucratic practices and technical instrumentalities whose  functions can be calculated, consciously managed and rationally controlled, but as a  machine ensemble whose “functioning” is undergirded by an excessive underbelly of  miraculous appearances, prayers, and prestige.
- Guarding over this coin box is a reliquary of devotional objects: rosaries swaying to  the rhythmic ensemble of combustion engines and traffic lights, a small statue of the  Santo Niño in his gesture of divine wisdom, perfumed garlands of freshly-blessed  flowers, printed images of the saints, and small woven curtains featuring pious  phrases such as “God is Love.” As previously mentioned, the communal practice of  fare collection culminates at the base of this shrine, an offering that not only ensures  that one maintains a legitimate space within the Jeepney, but a metaphysical insurance of safe passage on urban streets prone to accident, breakdown and contingency
## Güss & Tuason, 2008
- Religion has a dominant theme in jeepney imagery. For example, the Black Nazarene, the Sacred Heart of Jesus, Santo Niño (the child Jesus). There are also one-liners about reliance on God, such as ‘The Lord is my Shepherd,’ ‘In God we trust,’ and ‘God bless our trip.’ 
- Samples of religious items were crucifixes, small Buddha statues, rosaries, figurines of Santo Niño, Mary, and the saints, with phrases like ‘God bless our way.’
- Several referenced the Roman Catholic Church, El Shaddai (a born again Catholic group), and angels. For drivers and passengers who see them every day, there is a mutual reliance on God. Being maka-Diyos (faithful to God) is reiterated when they see their struggles and difficulties in a hopeful light. 
- Religion plays an important role in Filipino life, such as being an anchor and a source of hope. Religious decorations serve as requests for protection and guidance. Religion is also expressed in the actions. Often, drivers mumble a short prayer at the start of their work day or when beginning a route while passengers make the sign of a cross when passing a church or passing an accident.
## Menez, 1998
- A central place is as signed to religious paraphernalia—rosary beads, assorted medals and holy pictures, a miniature altar dedicated to the Christ Child or the Virgin Mary, garlanded with fresh and dried flowers, and adorned with electric votive lights. 
- In 1984, a sudden plethora of jeepney slogans like “Praise the Lord,” “Christ is the Lord,” and “The New Kingdom” announced a new religious trend in a predominantly Catholic country. Charismatic movements and American evangelism enthralled a packed coliseum night after night in Metropolitan Manila. 

# Love and Sex
## Quilantang, 2024
- Often represented by images of attractive women or text that sexualises them. These symbols reflect societal norms around beauty, romance, desire, and gender roles. These depictions can range from innocent flirtation to more overt sexualisation, suggesting the pervasive influence of patriarchal norms and the male gaze in public spaces.
- Prominently displayed images and texts of sexualised females echo the societal norms and attitudes towards love and sex (Meñez 46), as also observed by Torres. These images, placed on the jeepney’s interior and exterior, signal a more liberal societal perspective, illuminating the dialogic relationship between popular culture and the traditional cultural surroundings.
- Torres also refers to it as the Machismo or masculine culture of Filipinos. The jeepney coincidentally is also refer as hari ng kalsada (king of the road), further signifying its assigned gender. With its vibrant, loud, and imposing presence, the jeepney is often seen as a symbol of masculinity. Its colourful, rugged exterior, the roar of its engine, and the thrill of manoeuvring through dense city traffic all contribute to the image of the jeepney as a masculine entity.
- The masculine connotation is further underscored by the fact that jeepney driving, a profession predominantly occupied by men, requires physical strength, courage, and assertiveness, characteristics stereotypically associated with masculinity.
- As these symbols are not stationary, they move through public spaces as part of the jeepney, actively disseminating and reinforcing these norms (Pearce 56). In relation to the gendered symbols, the depictions of women, whether innocent or sexualised, are not stationary. They move within the public space as an integral part of the jeepney. As these images travel through urban and rural areas, they engage with the public, actively disseminating and reinforcing societal norms around beauty, romance, desire, and gender roles. The mobility of these images amplifies their impact as they become a consistent and widespread aspect of the visual landscape, contributing to the public’s collective understanding and reinforcement of these norms.

## Blanton, 2015
- Although much controversy has been fomented as  of late from large outdoor advertisements featuring images of “sexualized” bodies  and verbal sexual innuendo, these visual examples pale in comparison to the highly  eroticized images of women often featured on the side panels of the Jeepney. In fact,  the voluptuous images of anime cartoons and other figures of male fantasy often  appear alongside images of the Virgin Mary. In a kind of surrealist profanation, the  ecstatic countenance of the erotic cartoon image suggests an expression that is also  visually depicted on the face of many Jeepney images of the Virgin.
## Menez, 1998
- The most important area of competition is sex. A common stereotype of the jeepney driver, well accepted by themselves, is that of the great lover, “Lady Killer,” “Chick Hunter,”, “I am the greatest.” The image of the great lover is also associated with economic success as a driver. 
- However, [[#^1f1c99|all the three cautionary messages]] also allude to the hazards involved in extramarital affairs. A kabit [clinger] in Tagalog slang is a mistress; a singit [wedge] is the third party in a love triangle. 
- Extramarital affairs are a favorite topic for jeepney commentary. A common term for cheating on one’s spouse or lover is the Tagalog slang kumakaliwa [literally, making a left turn]. Everyone knows therefore, that the sign Huwag kaliwa on a jeepney does not literally mean “Do not make a left turn.”
- Another word for unfaithful is kalewete [literally, left-handed], which appears in a driver’s prayer, Dios ko, iligtas mo po ako sa babaeng kalewete [My God, deliver me from a “left-handed” woman]. 
- Once more, the concept of lamangan [one upmanship] is applicable here since, as mentioned previously, the number of mistresses a driver can afford to keep is supposedly a gauge of his social status. Furthermore, a great lover should also be able to “cut in” or take away someone’s wife or lover. In a society with a double standard of sexual morality, it is usually the man who gets away with extramarital affairs. Theoretically, however, in cultural terms it is the “left-handed” wife of a “left-turning” husband who should ultimately win the game of one-upmanship. 
- A number of these messages are reminders to pay one’s fare, “Pay as you enter,” “Forget everything but not your fare.” Some are warnings about occupying more space than warranted, like the caption on a sticker showing a half naked lady with her legs crossed, Kaunting ipit, baka po masilip ng mga matang mainit [Cross your legsa little tighter, these “hot” eyes might take a peek].
- Female passengers are often the target of these inscriptions, as in the following rhymes: ^ad1602
	- Pag sexy, libre [If you’re sexy, you're free] 
	- Pag taba, doble [If you're fat, your fare is double] 
	- Pag pangit, triple [If you’re ugly, your fare is triple]
- or more creatively, “You lost your virginity in my imagination.” Such aggressive language against women ordinarily would be intolerable; here, however, these messages are not meant to be taken seriously, so that what might be viewed as offensive in other contexts generally passes censorship, like the following “antisocial” rhymes seen on two different vehicles:
	- Di nais ko na kayo ay pigilin, ngunit ang utot ay masamang hangin [It is not my wish to stop you, But a fart is bad wind].  
	- Pigilin ang pagutot, nang ang hangin ay di bumantot [Suppress your fart In order not to foul the air].


# Politics
## Güss & Tuason, 2008
- Jeepneys are also verbose in politics expressed in decorations such as ‘No to oil price hike’ and political campaign ads. 
- Jeepney drivers, especially, are extensively aware of politics as they understand the impact it has on their work. Out of nationalism or desperation, Filipinos are highly involved in movements against governmental institutions running the country. For instance, several non-violent manifestations successfully toppled a dictator in 1986. 
- These movements were attended by millions of Filipinos who prayed, held vigils, sang, and stayed in the streets until the incumbent president fled or stepped down. People Power movements attest to the Filipino’s pakikibaka (advocacy for change or some kind of rebellion) and pakikisama sa kapwa (cooperation with others). 
- This political awareness is still relevant in modern times. For instance, the government's modernization program in 2022 continuing today, which sought to phase out traditional jeepneys for standardized electric vehicles, was received by many drivers as a cultural and political erasure, the removal of one of the most prominent symbols of the working-class

# Family
## Quilantang, 2024
- Family plays a crucial role in Filipino culture and is often symbolically represented on jeepneys (Flores). Symbols such as family portraits, names, and depictions of familyoriented activities frequently adorn jeepneys. These icons bear a direct meaning linked to the concept of family and kinship. 
- However, these symbols also embody Filipinos’ deep value on family relationships and the role of the family as a source of motivation and strength.
- In the context of the jeepney driver, the symbols often represent their connection to their loved ones, reminding them of whom they work hard for and why they persist in a challenging occupation.
- For passengers, these symbols elicit a sense of empathy and connection, acknowledging that the driver is not just a service provider but a person with a family relying on them. This understanding can positively influence the interactions between drivers and passengers, promoting a sense of community and shared human experience. Additionally, the prominence of family symbols on jeepneys can reflect the collective Filipino identity, which highly values familial ties and obligations.
## Bastos, 2008
- Filipinos’ notion of a self is more attached to the family than to the individual. The authors stress the insufficiency of the Philippines’ system of social protection, where the family is the main or the only source of security. 
## Güss & Tuason, 2008
- Names written on jeepneys are also a common sight, including names of drivers, their loved ones—spouses, parents, or children—coined names for the jeepney, or fabricated names that represent two or three people’s names combined (e.g., KhitJanLy, Pol-pog part 1). 
- These names express honor and affection towards people significant in drivers’ lives. Names on jeepneys show a preference towards people (makatao) and the value of family relationships. They signify perseverance (pagsisikap) for someone or gratitude (utang na loob).

# Driving Speed
## Quilantang, 2024
- Speed motifs on jeepneys, such as chrome miniature wings, missiles, birds, and aeroplanes, offer a fascinating entry point for understanding Filipino culture and society. 
- These symbols directly refer to speed, power, and motion—elements inherently associated with the vehicle itself and its function as a mode of transport. The wings, for instance, denote the concept of flight, representing high speed and freedom (Torres 14-18). Similarly, missiles signify swiftness and power, while birds and airplanes serve as universal emblems of fast travel.
- Moreover, the emphasis on speed also mirrors broader societal dynamics. In the fast-paced urban setting where jeepneys operate, speed may connote efficiency, competitiveness, and a relentless drive to keep up with the demands of daily life.
## Menez, 1998
- Juxtaposed with this portrayal of the relentless struggle for economic survival is the ostentatious, uninhibited style of jeepney folk art. According to Emmanuel Torres, the excessive embellishments are due to horror vacui, “a fear of empty space, that seemingly compulsive filling up of every square inch of surface commonly observed in popular visual arts,” resulting in modern rococo decor. 
- The assemblage of assorted objects representing speed is original jeepney art: chrome miniature wings, missiles and winged horses on the hood, paintings of birds and airplanes on the sides 
- Such “special effects” are intended to attract the commuter and to impress upon the public that the driver is not only economically successful but also au courant. Paintings of rural scenes are often commissioned by the owners.
# Success
## Menez, 1998; Blanton, 2015, as cited in Quilantang, 2024
- Aspirations for economic success are often symbolised on jeepneys through images of money, popular brand logos, and representations of successful individuals or high-status objects (Meñez). 
- These symbols carry meanings related to wealth, prosperity, and economic achievement. In the broader Filipino socio-economic context, these symbols can represent aspirations for financial stability, upward mobility, and the desire to transcend socio-economic challenges (Blanton).
# Language
## Menez, 1998
- Linguistic play is a prominent feature in Philippine languages, and by extension, its jeepney inscriptions, enriched by the multilingual resources of the city. Jeepney inscriptions use the three dominant languages in the nation’s capital—Tagalog (on which the national language, Pilipino, is based), English (which is still considered an official language), and Taglish (a mixture of the two languages). Typically “mix-mix,” as Taglish is also known, is the sign, “No parking” sa hindi mo “darling” [Don’t park with someone whois not your darling]. Literal translations of Tagalog slang into English like the sign, “Left—turning Lover” [unfaithful lover] *Jeepney drivers speak Tagalog but typically have learned some English in elementary school and from the media.*
- Their favorite form of verbal manipulation is the transposition of syllables, Erfat [Father], or letters, Jeprocks, Jeeprox, Jeffrox, etc., for “Projects” [Jeprocts]. Punning is also used with words or sounds from Tagalog, English, and Spanish, as in “God knows Hudas not pay.” [Tagalog/Spanish, pronounced “who does” for the Biblical traitor Judas Iscariot]. 
- The superimposition of native and foreign words on one another has produced such signs as “tSuperman”  [tsuper: driver] and MACHOnurin [Macho + masunurin, obedient].
- The content and style of these linguistic, as well as artistic, innovations reflect the flamboyance, earthy humor, satiric wit, and daredevil driving style of their creators. These “kings of the road” live and work according to their philosophy, “Work hard, enjoy hard,” which underlies their competitive strategies for achieving power and status. 
- Jeepney messages often offer advice couched in rhymes with double meanings like the following examples seen on three different vehicles:  
	- Basta kabit, may sabit [If you hang on, you'll get caught (snagged)] 
	- Puede kabit, puera sabit [You may hang on, but don’t get caught] 
	- Puede singit, huwag ipit [You may cut in, but don’t get caught in between] ^1f1c99
- The first two slogans ostensibly warn passengers about the danger of hanging on to the handle in the rear entrance of the jeepney while trying to board the vehicle. The third slogan is addressed to other drivers about the risks of cutting in. 

# Art
## Parrucho, 2023
- Focuses on the Jeepney as a canvas for Filipino artistic expression. Based on the data gathered, these have been illustrated with different artworks, including paintings and slogans. Furthermore, according to the participants, some Jeepney ornamentals are made from reinvented scrap and transformed into something new and useful.
- Jeepneys serve as canvases for Filipino artistic expression. Owners customize their vehicles with graffiti, line art, anime, and portraits. Some even incorporate K-pop culture celebrities, political personalities, or religious themes. According to Mercado (1994), the owner might reflect his feelings, worth, and overall personality onto them. Some Jeepney ornaments were made of recycled materials, according to participants. This means that Filipinos may improvise and reuse scraps and abandoned resources to create new and valuable products (Su and Tanyag, 2020).
## Menez, 1998
- Juxtaposed with this portrayal of the relentless struggle for economic survival is the ostentatious, uninhibited style of jeepney folk art. According to Emmanuel Torres, the excessive embellishments are due to horror vacui, “a fear of empty space, that seemingly compulsive filling up of every square inch of surface commonly observed in popular visual arts,” resulting in modern rococo decor. 
1. but the assemblage of assorted objects representing speed is original jeepney art: chrome miniature wings, missiles and winged horses on the hood, paintings of birds and airplanes on the sides, and long colorful plastic streamers that fly in the wind as the jeep zooms in and out of traffic. 
	- Such “special effects” are intended to attract the commuter and to impress upon the public that the driver is not only economically successful but also au courant. Paintings of rural scenes are often commissioned by the owners.

# Inscriptions
## Menez, 1998
- Jeepney inscriptions are rhetorical devices for attaining social and material gains. They are addressed not only to fellow motorists but also to everyone else on the street, especially prospective passengers. Just as the rich ornamentation is intended to attract the more discerning commuters, these messages are meant to entice the potential rider, thus, Kung nais mo ay ligaya, sa akin ka sumakay/sumama [If happiness is your desire, ride with me (variant: go out with me)], and to provide entertainment for the duration of the ride. The driver in turn has an appreciative audience

> When you ride the Philippine jeepney, you don’t read a newspaper. You read the jeepney itself. For a jeepney is graffiti; it is the driver’s advertisement for himself. All those prayers, mottos, proverbs, captions and one-liners that clutter up the dashboard are meant to communicate this fact: that the driver with his back to you is a man, he is alive, and like his vehicle, he is unique. *Nestor Torre, “The Jeepney as Literature,” Archipelago 1:4 (1974): 6.*

- [[#^ad1602|These messages]] are instead intended to relieve some of the tensions generated by the frenetic pace of urban life: the competition for passengers on the part of the driver, the competition for a ride on the part of the commuter, and for all who work and live on city streets, environmental pressures such as the extreme tropical heat, the fumes from the vehicles, and the hazards and aggravations of frequently flooded streets. 
- As city dwellers—drivers and passengers—battle with the impossible traffic in Manila’s congested streets, jeepney folk art and inscriptions provide a relief from what would otherwise be a grim battlefield. As Alan Dundes and Carl Pragter point out: “While urban life may produce alienation, it also generates urban folklore to help make the ills and pressures of modern society just a little bit more bearable.” (Dundes & Pagter, 1976)

According to Adovas et al. (2024), most of the jeepney drivers are still struggling financially to provide for their daily necessities despite being the primary source of transportation for a lot of Filipinos. Many drivers pay for their jeepney fees, and the remaining budget is for their food and family needs. 

Additionally, as mentioned in the study of Cunanan et al. (2024), jeepney drivers typically earned around ₱500 per day, while jeepney operators normally earn between ₱2,500 and ₱3,000. The high cost of modern jeepney exceeds the capacity on operators and drivers, placing a heavy financial burden on both of them. As a result, drivers are forced to work long hours just to keep up with expenses. 

Rodriguez (2024) explained that in the modernization of jeepneys, the concerns of jeepney drivers are their salaries. They will no longer be paid a regular salary regardless of the number of passengers they serve each day, and they will need to abandon the "boundary system" they used to. Modernization can help lessen the careless driving and accidents on the road, however, it can result in high costs for drivers and operators which also affects the fares of commuters.

In the study of Kecorius et al. (2017), in the Philippines, particularly in Manila, ultrafine soot particles or black carbon (BC) are present in the environment and it causes adverse respiratory and cardiovascular effects which increases the cases of asthma and premature deaths. This affects jeepney drivers and commuters the most, as they are exposed to polluted air daily.

Furthermore, Seva et al. (2011), found that it is not only the passengers who can experience discomfort while riding a jeepney but also the jeepney drivers that were likely to endure discomfort, due to poor design of their workspace. Their current workspace did not go along with the body measurements of the drivers  and the drivers were subjected to awkward posture, due to the location of controls and task of collecting fares. 

Beltran et al. (2024) emphasized that long working hours, low income, traffic congestion, challenging job environments, and road construction contribute to increased dangerous driving among jeepney drivers. Similarly, Cañada et al. (2021) stated that physical or mental exhaustion that resulted in fatigue can reduce attentiveness, poor judgment, and slower reaction times, which significantly increases risky driving practices. These challenges faced by the drivers are important to consider because they can affect passengers safety and comfort during daily commutes.
