# McFarlane et al., 2025
- Metro Manila (hereafter “Manila”), one of the world’s largest densest and most unequal cities, reflects this wider regional context. The city’s density by number of people per km2 has increased by 36% since 2000 and over half the population lives in dense low-income neighborhoods (Edelman, 2016; Valencia, 2016). 
- Many of Manila’s poorest residents are vulnerable to flooding and associated health problems caused by inadequate housing, sanitation, and industrial waste, as well as absorbing the worst of the impact of typhoons ([Hodal, 2013]([https://assets.rockefellerfoundation.org/app/ uploads/20130926223344/The-Informal-City-Reader.pdf]()))
- The hazards are as much political as they are ecological. For example, the ongoing Manila Bay Rehabilitation Program, flood control infrastructure, road development, and proposed reclamation projects along coastal Manila have intensified precarity ([Alvarez & Cardenas, 2019](https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2427.12757); [Saguin & Alvarez, 2022](https://doi. org/10.1080/10630732.2021.2009288)).
- One of the densest areas in Manila, where these issues have been magnified, is the central district of Tondo, where the population density ranges from 72,200 to 91,637 people per km2 ([Boquet, 2015](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-4-431-55043-3_23); [Philippine Statistics Authority, 2016](https://www.psa.gov.ph/content/ highlights-philippine-population-2015-census-population.)). Tondo is a densely settled coastal area along Manila Bay. The district is a symbol of Manila’s uneven urban growth and where the poorest neighborhoods proliferated
- Manila has some of the highest levels of traffic congestion in Asia, a “carmageddon” costing an estimated £45 million every day ([Howard, 2016](https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/03/carmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffichttps://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Publications/Urban%20Development/EAP_Urban_Expansion_full_report_web.pdf.))One of the most popular means of transport in the city are jeepneys (jeeps) – crowded, colorful, and part of the culture in the city, and which took shape during the American colonial period as repurposed military trucks. They are used in almost half of all public transport trips and by the poor in particular ([Coonan, 2016](https://www.irishtimes.com/news/world/asia-pacific/residents-of-manila-s-happyland-slum-put-faith-in-duterte-1.2707230)).
# Francisco et al., 2025
- As indicated by the Urban Mobility Readiness Index (2022), out of 60 cities Manila  was placed 56th in the public transit sub-index. The subindex aimed at measuring the  performance of a city on utilization, public transit density, and efficiency rate. In the main  ranking of Urban Mobility Readiness Index (UMRI), the city of Manila was ranked as 58th.
- Jeepney drivers should not insist on taking other passengers if they already see that it  is crowded inside. Many ordinary and able-bodied citizens are already suffering because of  the heat and crowding inside the jeep, especially senior citizens and PWD passengers.  Sometimes, people are already voicing out their feelings about the situation, however, it is  still being ignored. It is common knowledge that jeepney drivers just want to make enough  money and they cannot be held accountable for those actions and blame them.
- According to the Amended Implementing Rules and Regulations of Batas Pambansa  Bilang 344, or the Accessibility Law, Accessibility for persons with disability (PWD) should  also be considered and applied in public transport vehicles such as passenger buses, jeepneys,  and passenger trains such as the LRT and its terminals. While it is a long-standing law,  established in 1982, many of these transportation systems see a lack of implementation or  poor maintenance of said amenities.
- The seats at the entrance of a jeepney and some other public vehicles are provided for  the convenience of the PWDs and Senior Citizens. However, some people tend to disregard  this matter and still continue to occupy the seats even though it is clear that it is not for them.  Sometimes, operators and conductors tend to forbid these events however sometimes it just  simply cannot be avoided especially with the passengers who often insist.
- In addition to that, jeepney drivers or operators should be careful while they are driving. Not all, but many of the jeepneys drive fast especially when  there are only a few other vehicles on the road. Additionally, due to their fast driving, their passengers often bump their heads, some even fall from their  seats due to the fast speeds of the jeep.
- The first senior citizen respondent suffers from poor vision and hearing, which  prevents them from reading signs properly and cannot hear whenever the operator indicates  the stop. Since they mostly use jeepneys as their mode of transport, they wish for better  amenities in jeepney terminals and include clear audio cues for every stop.
- upon  observing the design of the traditional jeepneys with elevated entrance and exit steps, it is far from being an inclusive design for PWDs and senior citizens. Apparently, the inaccessibility  and lack of inclusivity of the existing designs of most public transport vehicles in the country  is a massive issue that prevents some people from this sector from utilizing the means of  public transportation. Senior citizens and people with disabilities, and even some ordinary  commuters often struggle with the elevated steps of public transportation vehicles. Safety  handrails also needed to be enhanced in order to ensure the safety of people with disabilities,  senior citizens, and the community at large.
# Cruz, 2024
- Due to several geographical, cultural, microeconomic, and macroeconomic conditions in the Philippines, public transportation remains to be one of the most debilitated systems in the country (Boquet 2012; Dimalanta et al. 2023; Pojani and Stead 2017).
- Among urbanized regions alone, public transportation constitutes up to 80% of the means which Filipino commuters regularly depend on (Dimalanta et al. 2023). 
- Despite the consistent and overwhelming demand for effective and formalized public transportation options, the supply remains limited and the national needs among the Filipino people are perpetually unmet (Cervero 2000; Chang et al. 2021; Zulueta et al. 2024). 
- Informal transportation such as jeepneys, tricycles, and taxis are popular alternatives in response to the lack of standard or state-run transportation services in the Philippines (Mendoza 2021; Regidor et al. 2009).
- These alternative options for commuting are labelled as paratransit seeing they lack proper safety measures, are unsustainable due to their significant carbon emissions, unmonitored, and unregulated (Dimalanta et al. 2023; Regidor et al. 2009).
- Despite their reputation as unsustainable and unsafe transportation options, these paratransit vehicles are nonetheless patronized by Filipinos due to their affordability, accessibility, and convenience (Dimalanta et al. 2023; Mendoza 2021; Mettke et al. 2016). Jeepneys and tricycles have become cultural symbols in the Philippines, signifying the resourcefulness, creativity, innovativeness, religiosity, and resilience of Filipino people (Mateo-Babiano 2015; Vinzons 2015).
# Ceccato et al., 2022
- Overall, the importance of gender on fear was clear, as female students in all cities felt more unsafe in transit settings than their male counterparts, with perceived fear to be more intense during the nighttime.
- In Manila, Sao Paulo, and Rio Claro, somewhat higher percentages of LGBTQI students expressed feelings of lack of safety in transit settings than non-LGBTQI students.
- Students reported feeling safer during the day than at night. This is consistent with previous research that indicates that fear intensifies after dark, likely because more violent crimes happen during the evening/night in transportation settings because of desolation and low levels of guardianship.
- female students took more precautions than male students did in all transit environments. However, the percentage of students taking precautions was context-specific and varied considerably by city.
# Tus, 2021
- Every public transport driver's Life was difficult even before the pandemic because of the average amount of income that covers only their everyday financial expenses such as food, rental fees, electricity fees, and other costs [Raskin, S,. & Meyer, D. (2020, August 30). It's hard being an NYC pedicab driver during the COVID-19 pandemic. https://nypost.com/2020/08/30/the-experience-of-a-nyc-pedicabdriver-during-COVID-19/amp/]
- Other drivers haul plastic compartments and cardboard signs around their necks to grab the eye and compassion of passing motorists. Some of them are selling fruits and vegetables to fit their daily needs. The other jeepney drivers are selling fruits, vegetables, and other products. (Garcia, 2020). Jeepney drivers have nowhere to go, and no one relies on them. It's embarrassing to ask for help from their relatives every day, so the drivers gathered the courage and asked for help [Garcia, M. A. ( 2020 September 18). Jeepney drivers set up mobile palengke amid COVID19 pandemic. https://www.msn.com/en-ph/news/national/jeepney-drivers-set-up-mobilepalengke-amid-COVID-19-pandemic/ar-BB19b6vX] from other people who are willing to help them so they can eat.
- COVID-19 pandemic affects everyone, some more drastically than others, and for several families, it could mean making big changes to their daily routine due to financial difficulties. [N.A, (2020, Apr 4). Effects of COVID-19 on Families. Health. https://www.uchealth.com/en/media-room/COVID-19/effects-of-COVID-19-on-families]
- Danny Mateo used to be a Jeepney Driver but realized that he could not support his family with driving he starts to plant vegetables'. [Sarian Z. (2020,April 15) Farming Success: Meet A Jeepney Driver Who Turned To Farming And Grew Rich https://zacsarian.com/farming-success-meet-a-jeepney-driverwho-turned-to-farming-and-grew-rich/]
- The Church leader told the Jeepney drivers to continue praying for a pandemic to end, which is the only way to get back on their everyday lives. 
- The other jeepney drivers are selling fruits, vegetables, and other products. Jeepney drivers have nowhere to go, and no one relies on them. They work all day on the road, and some of them have high blood pressure, diabetes, and another disease that may cause to weaken their immune system, and some of them is elderly with weak resistance.
- Many commercial drivers face several health challenges, including obesity, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. Such conditions place them at high risk for contracting COVID-19. This pressure compounded with well-being challenges has set extra mental and actual requests on drivers, putting them further in danger for COVID-19.
# Villaraza, 2017
- A greater majority of the HI respondents use private cars and taxis as primary modes in their daily travel while for LI respondents, the top three primary public transport mode being  used are the jeepney, rail, and tricycle, the most common available public transport modes in Metro Manila.
- More than half (67%) of the HI respondents need to change mode compared to only 30% of LI respondents when they travel.
- More than 80% of both respondents are willing to pay 15% to 30% more of the current fare just to avail an sustainable transport mode (STM).
- The mean ratings of the HI respondents on air pollution, security, and comfort are positive given that they are using mostly the private car as their primary transport mode while the LI respondents have higher mean rating of physical activities since they are using the public transport mode. Both respondents, however, aspires to have low level of stress when traveling.
- With regards to the feelings the respondents associate with the available modes, the HI respondents considered Low Cost, the most, and associate it with buses and jeepneys.  
- This is followed by Discomfort and associated it to LRT and jeepney. In the case of LI respondents, Freedom is the most important consideration and associated it with the private car and this is followed by Low Cost but associated it with tricycles. 
- Both respondents considered the Private car as the most associated with Safety. This shows that most LI respondents aspire to own a car, being the mode with the highest number of positive  feelings associated with it.
- The HI respondents have higher expectations than the LI respondents on the following transport system issues: (a) access to activities, (b) range of modal options, (c) quality of modal options, and (d) affordability. 
- Furthermore, the HI respondents put higher relevance compared to LI respondents to the following: (a) presence of trees, (b) access to parks, (d) access to STM, and (e) affordability of STM.
- The HI respondents‟ rating of the desired level of access to transport infrastructures are also generally higher than that of LI respondents which would mean the former desire  for a much better transport infrastructures since the current level are still not satisfactory for them.
- With regards to the primary transport mode used by the LI respondents, around 32% of them use jeepneys followed by rail (23%) and tricycles (21%).
- The respondents were asked to indicate the feelings that they associate with the following transport modes. They can also choose as many as they like. For the HI respondents, the most used description is Low Cost (406), with buses and jeepneys having the highest scores among the modes, this is followed by Discomfort (286) with the LRT and jeepneys being the top two modes having this description
- This would mean that the LI respondents felt that currently their transport modal options are much more limited when performing the daily activities such as visiting relatives, recreational and cultural activities, grocery shopping, sports, and social activities.
- In access to activities, range of modal options, quality of modal options and affordability, HI has higher expectations than the LI ==BAHALA NA==
- In social interaction, the LI respondents have higher ratings than the HI respondents. This is expected since the LI respondents use public transport as their primary mode where social interaction is more prevalent. 
- In presence of trees, access to parks, access, and affordability, the mean ratings of HI respondents are always higher than that of the LI respondents. Since these issues can be considered as added value to the transport system, it is understandable that the HI respondents‟ rating are higher since most are already secured when they travel using their private vehicles.
- HI respondents have significantly higher mean rating for all such as Park and squares, Cinemas, theatres, and museums, Health facilities, Grocery, shops and trade, and Educational facilities compared to LI respondents. 
- In terms of improving the facilities needed for basic necessities like health facilities, grocery shops, malls and trade and educational facilities, no significant difference between the two set of respondents was observed.
# Abad & Fillone, 2017
- Road networks are vulnerable to natural disasters because its impacts greatly affect travel conditions. Naturally, after the occurrence of a disaster event, some areas would be less accessible (e.g. road closures or a collapsed bridge because of an earthquake, or flooded and inaccessible roads due to heavy rainfall).
# Lucas et al., 2016
- It is already evident that the transport conditions and mobility behaviours of lower-income population groups have very specific patterns that are highly differentiated from their higher-income counterparts in almost every country in the world. Specific recognition of these differences is extremely important for the planning and delivery of economically, environmentally and socially sustainable transport systems.
- First of all, the poorest groups in any given country tend to be less mobile. They most often suffer from a lack of both private and public transport services in terms of the number of options and the quality of services that are available to them [Barter PA (1999) Transport and urban poverty in Asia: a brief introduction to the key issues. Regional Development Dialogue 20(1): 143–163.; Titheridge H, Christie N, Mackett R, Oviedo Hernandez D and Ye R (2014) Transport and Poverty. A Review of the Evidence. UCL, London, UK.]. As such, they are forced to rely on options such as walking and cycling, often over long distances and in unsafe conditions. They are, therefore, also more exposed to road-related casualties and deaths and to traffic-related pollutants (both in the living/working areas and in their mobility patterns), which also has knock-on negative consequences for their health and well-being
- in urban areas poor people are most often located in peripheral locations at the edges of cities with a low amenity value, where there are few local employment opportunities and an absence of local services and basic facilities. This conflates with their lack of access to transport options to produce a ‘poverty trap’, which limits their wider access to jobs, education and health facilities, social networks and more generally their ‘right to the city’ [Harvey D (2003) The right to the city. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 27(4): 939–994.].
- there is a disconnection between the mobility needs of low-income, non-car-owning citizens to move and act freely within compact and walkable cities and the development trend for segregated, gated, car-friendly and gentrified settings, which correspond with the lifestyle preferences of middle- and higher-class populations [Barter PA (1999) Transport and urban poverty in Asia: a brief introduction to the key issues. Regional Development Dialogue 20(1): 143–163.; Soja EW (2010) Seeking Spatial Justice. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN, USA.].
- A number of academic studies have suggested that the poorest sectors of society also do not equally benefit from new or improved transport infrastructures and services [Booth D, Hanmer L and Lovell E (2000) Poverty and Tansport. A Report Prepared for the World Bank in Collaboration with DFID. Overseas Development Institute, London, UK.; Gachassin M, Najman B and Raballand G (2010) The Impact of Roads on Poverty Reduction: A Case Study of Cameroon. World Bank, Washington, DC, USA, Policy Research Working Paper 5209, pp. 1–37.; Hettige H (2006) When Do Rural Roads Benefit the Poor and How? An In-Depth Analysis Based on Case Studies. Asian Development Bank (ADB), Manila, Philippines.; Khandker SR and Koolwal GB (2011) Estimating the Long-term Impacts of Rural Roads: A Dynamic Panel Approach. World Bank, Washington, DC, USA, Policy Research Working Paper 5867.; Mu R and van de Walle D (2011) Rural roads and local market development in Vietnam. Journal of Development Studies 47(5): 709–734.]. This may either be because they do not have access and/or money to public transportation if not hindered by the inconveniences of the said transit networks. The poorest population groups are further marginalised community severance and increased road casualties and deaths.
- It is extremely difficult to construct a concise definition for transport poverty based on unmet household needs. First, transport poverty resides with individuals rather than the whole household (i.e. one member of a household may experience it, whereas another member of the same household does not) [Booth D, Hanmer L and Lovell E (2000) Poverty and Tansport. A Report Prepared for the World Bank in Collaboration with DFID. Overseas Development Institute, London, UK.; Robinson R and Thagesen B (2004) Road Engineering for Development. Spon Press, London, UK and New York, NY, USA.]
- Second, mobility is largely associated with the secondary benefit of providing accessibility to goods, services and activities. These activities are all highly socially, temporally and geographically context-specific, making it more difficult to construct a single definitive indicator of transport poverty. It is, therefore, unclear whether transport poverty relates to a deficiency in transport supply, and/or to some minimum level of mobility, and/or to a level of accessibility to goods, services and daily activities.
- Furthermore, different terminologies have been used interchangeably to describe transport poverty within the various literatures. Terms such as ‘transport/mobility poverty’ [Ahrend C, Schwedes O, Daubitz S, Böhme U and Herget M (2014) Kleiner Begriffskanon der Mobilitätsforschung. Fachgebiet Integrierte Verkehrsplanung, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany, discussion paper (in German).; Martens K (2013) Role of the bicycle in the limitation of transport poverty in the Netherlands. Transportation Research Record 2387: 20–25.; Velaga NR, Beecroft M and Nelson JD (2012) Transport poverty meets the digital divide: accessibility and connectivity in rural communities. Journal of Transport Geography (21): 102–112.], ‘accessibility poverty’ [Martens K and Bastiaanssen J (2014) An index to measure accessibility poverty risk. Proceedings of Colloquium Vervoersplanologisch Speurwerk, Eindhoven, the Netherlands; Scheiner J (2008) Accessibility, spatial context and location preferences: is there evidence for accessibility poverty? In How to Define and Measure Access and Need Satisfaction (Becker U, Böhmer J and Gerike R (eds)). Transport Series of Dresden Institute for Transportation and Environment (DIVU), Dresden, Germany, pp. 193–225.], ‘transport-related social exclusion’ [Currie G, Richardson T, Smyth P et al. (2009) Investigating links between transport disadvantage, social exclusion and well-being in Melbourne–preliminary results. Transport Policy 16(3): 97–105.] and ‘transport disadvantage’ [Currie G, Richardson T, Smyth P et al. (2009) Investigating links between transport disadvantage, social exclusion and well-being in Melbourne–preliminary results. Transport Policy 16(3): 97–105.] are used with often very different, although also overlapping definitions. This is unhelpful and, as Lucas and Markovich note: ‘there is a need to establish a lexicon of definitions to ensure a greater degree of clarity and consistency within and between the academic and policy literature’ [Lucas K and Markovich J (2011) International perspectives. In New Perspectives and Methods in Transport and Social Exclusion Research (Currie G (ed.)). Emerald, Bingley, UK, pp. 223–239.].
- An individual is transport poor if, in order to satisfy their daily basic activity needs, at least one of the following conditions apply.  
	- There is no transport option available that is suited to the individual’s physical condition and capabilities. 
	- The existing transport options do not reach destinations where the individual can fulfil his/her daily activity needs, in order to maintain a reasonable quality of life. 
	- The necessary weekly amount spent on transport leaves the household with a residual income below the official poverty line. 
	- The individual needs to spend an excessive amount of time travelling, leading to time poverty or social isolation. 
	- The prevailing travel conditions are dangerous, unsafe or unhealthy for the individual.
- It can be concluded  that transport poverty is an extremely under-explored and poorly articulated problem even within developed countries that has not been properly communicated to the transport engineers, policymakers and consultants.
- Even in countries such as the UK, with an extensive road network and high levels of car ownership, some sectors of the population (and notably the poorest and most vulnerable) are affected by transport poverty.
- Low-income groups usually spend a high percentage of their income on transport but have the lowest quality transport systems available to them, whereas higher-income groups spend a much lower share of their earning on transport and have the highest quality transport systems available to them. This is reflected in poorer income groups travelling less, walking more and limiting their travel to mandatory trips such as working and studying. They are also most often disproportionately exposed to unsafe and unhealthy travelling environments, leading to greater incidences of traffic-related deaths and exposures.
- One of the main barriers to a better policy understanding of the problem of transport poverty is the level and sophistication of available data needed to research the problem in any meaningful way. Collection of such data is both time-consuming and costly if it is to be executed with the level of rigour, regularity and transparency that is necessary for detailed analysis.
- transport poverty itself, which is explained as an overarching combination of the subset of 
## Transport Affordability
- The lack of individual/household resources to afford transportation options, typically with reference to the car (in developed countries) and/or public transport [Carruthers R, Dick M and Saurkar A (2005) Affordability of Public Transport in Developing Countries. The World Bank Group, Washington, DC, USA, Transport Papers, vol. TP-3, pp 1–27.; Litman T (2015) Transportation Affordability. Evaluation and Improvements Strategies. Victoria Transport Policy Institute, Victoria, Canada.; Serebrisky T, Gómez-Lobo A, Estupiñán N and Muñoz-Raskin R (2009) Affordability and subsidies in public urban transport: what do we mean, what can be done? Transport Reviews: A Transnational Transdisciplinary Journal 29(6): 715–739.]
- Available and affordable transportation might lead to other stresses in terms of the journey time required, unsafe and uncomfortable travelling conditions, etc. However, as the urban populations of many developing countries become more and more dependent on the use of private motorised vehicles, it is likely that the people who cannot afford even these modes of transport will become similarly marginalised (as their low-income counterparts in the developed world) from participating in everyday life chance activities [Booth D, Hanmer L and Lovell E (2000) Poverty and Tansport. A Report Prepared for the World Bank in Collaboration with DFID. Overseas Development Institute, London, UK.].
- In developed countries, as [Litman T (2015) Transportation Affordability. Evaluation and Improvements Strategies. Victoria Transport Policy Institute, Victoria, Canada.] highlights, there is indeed a narrow link between transport affordability and social exclusion, as unaffordable transport can exclude people from accessing basic activities such as education or shopping.
- Moreover, it can lead to the sacrifice of essential expenditures such as food or medicines. The goal of ensuring affordable and inclusive public transport services should be traded off against that of ensuring sufficient revenue for good quality services. This can only be achieved through some form of financial subsidy, most usually delivered through the State [Gwilliam KM (2002) Cities on the Move: a World Bank Urban Transport Strategy Review. World Bank Publications, Washington, DC, USA.].
- Measured via Income, quantity of travel, single trip fare represented as average and bottom quintile per capita incomes [Carruthers R, Dick M and Saurkar A (2005) Affordability of Public Transport in Developing Countries. The World Bank Group, Washington, DC, USA, Transport Papers, vol. TP-3, pp 1–27.]
## Mobility Poverty 
- systemic lack of (usually motorised) transport that generates difficulties in moving, often (but not always) connected to a lack of services or infrastructures [Moore J, Lucas K and Bates J (2013) Social Disadvantage and Transport in the UK: A Trip-based Approach. School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, TSU Working Paper Series, Ref. 1063.]
- there is a proved correlation between low income and mobility poverty, whereby mobility problems are the result of poverty situations and at the same time compound them.
- Measured via trip frequency, distance, and duration taken represented as vulnerable populations segments (elderly, children, disabled people, part-time job, job seekers) [Schmöcker J, Quddus M, Noland R et al. (2005) Estimating trip generation of the elderly and disabled people: an analysis of London data. Transportation Research Record 1924: 9–18.; Morency C, Paez A, Roorda M, Mercado R and Farber S (2011) Distance travelled in three Canadian cities: spatial analysis from the perspective of vulnerable population segments. Journal of Transport Geography 19(1): 39–50.; McQuaid R and Chen T (2012) Commuting times – the role of gender, children and part-time work. Research in Transportation Economics 34(1): 66–73.]
## Accessibility Poverty
- The difficulty of reaching certain key activities – such as employment, education, healthcare services, shops and so on – at reasonable time, ease and cost [DfT (Department for Transport) (2014a) Accessibility Statistics 2013. Department for Transport, London, UK.; SEU (Social Exclusion Unit) (2003) Making the Connections: Final Report on Transport and Social Exclusion. Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, London, UK.; Preston J and Rajé F (2007) Accessibility, mobility and transport-related social exclusion. Journal of Transport Geography 15(3): 151–160.]
- ==There is also more of a compelling need to consider the service quality and safety dimensions of people’s travel experiences, whether by public transport or nonmotorised modes, as well as the temporal dimension in terms of long travel distances, both to and from transit services and also while walking.==
- Measured via transport disadvantage, availability, and their difference represented as access to a private vehicle, demographics, crime levels, and accessibility in key interests, and transport provision/capita [Currie G (2004) Gap analysis of public transport needs. measuring spatial distribution of public transport needs and identifying gaps in the quality of public transport provision. Transportation Research Record 1895: 137–146.; Delmelle EC and Casas I (2012) Evaluating the spatial equity of bus rapid transit-based accessibility patterns in a developing country: the case of Cali, Colombia. Transport Policy 20: 36–46.; Jaramillo C, Lizarraga C and Grindlay AL (2012) Spatial disparity in transport social needs and public transport provision in Santiago de Cali (Colombia). Journal of Transport Geography 24: 340–357.]
## Exposure to Transport Externalities
- The outcomes of disproportionate exposures to the negative effects of the transport system, such as road traffic casualties and chronic diseases and deaths from traffic related pollution. Often considered within the US literature from an environmental justice perspective [Barter PA (1999) Transport and urban poverty in Asia: a brief introduction to the key issues. Regional Development Dialogue 20(1): 143–163.; Booth D, Hanmer L and Lovell E (2000) Poverty and Tansport. A Report Prepared for the World Bank in Collaboration with DFID. Overseas Development Institute, London, UK.]
- Includes disproportionate direct exposure of certain population groups to traffic-related environmental externalities, such as air and noise pollution, as well as traffic-related pedestrian casualties and deaths
- Measured via diesel PM air level, PM2-5 in the air, and count of vehicles at major roads within 500 m, divided by distance in metres (not km) represented as avrg. μg/m3, annual avrg. μg/m3, and avrg. annual daily traffic [EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency) (2015) EJSCREEN: Environmental Justice Screening and Mapping Tool. EPA, Washington, DC, USA. See [http://www.epa.gov/ejscreen](http://www.epa.gov/ejscreen) (accessed 15/11/2015).]
## Blanket Solutions
- currently many countries around the world offer blanket concessionary fares to certain targeted population groups, such as older and disabled people and without assessing their actual transport needs [Mackett R (2014) Has the policy of concessionary bus travel for older people in Britain been successful? Case Studies for Transport Policy 2(2): 81–88.].
- On the other hand, the specialist services that have been adapted for use by people with disabilities may not be free and so expensive to use. 
- Moreover, there are many social groups that experience transport poverty who do not currently receive such policy considerations at all, such as young people who are not in education and so must pay the full fare to travel on public transport even if they are in low-income households.
- Some countries in the ‘global north’, such as the USA, UK and France, have experimented with targeted small-scale transport interventions to assist people in transport poverty [Lucas K, Tyler S, Cervero R and Orfeuil J (2006) Moving from Welfare to Work: The Role of Transport. FIA Foundation, London, UK.]. Interventions have included offering free bus passes or community transport services. Although these policies may effectively target specific individuals, they do not provide a cost-effective way to address the widespread issues of transport poverty identified in this paper. 
- It is also unlikely that such policies could be introduced in any comprehensive way within the development context, where levels of excessive motorisation are already negatively affecting people’s quality of life in most large cities. Neither do they do anything to reverse the disproportionate negative impacts of the traffic system on countless transport-poor communities worldwide.
# Güss & Tuason, 2008
## Poverty
- Regarding life problems, both Manila and Davao drivers identified financial (Manila 56%, Davao 40%), personal (Manila 14%, Davao 9%), and family problems (Manila 9%, Davao 21%), with both groups identifying financial issues as their biggest concern. Financial problems included not having enough money to pay for the education of their children, buy food, pay rent on their homes, and for needed repairs to the jeepney.
- Both Manila and Davao drivers generally identified one personal life problem, mainly health issues such as back pain or persistent coughing.
- Manila drivers were more expressive of personal concerns: ‘I worry about temptations of faith,’ ‘My hotheadedness is my concern.’
- The driver would like to earn more because he would like to pay for his children’s education, provide for enough food, and pay the rent. Manila drivers, in contrast, more frequently expressed financial problems. Manila is the center of the Philippines in terms of government, trade, economics, and commerce, and it is undeniable that people move to Manila to work on the supposition that it offers more job opportunities. 
- Thus, financial concerns are at the fore. The data also show that Manila drivers described more problems plausibly resulting from financial stress, for example health and fatigue.
- Worries about work and conflicts with others are often due to money. The focus on financial problems substantiates Inglehart and Baker’s research (2000), characterizing Filipinos as high in survival values. To the Filipino driver, being able to survive includes pagsisikap (perseverance), tiyaga (hard work), and the courage to continue to work and survive impoverished conditions. Drivers frequently expressed the constant need to earn money; determination to work long hours; and the boldness and courage, bahala na, to put food on the table in any way possible.

## Transport Poverty
- The jeepney drivers reported work-related issues: bad road conditions (e.g., traffic congestion, rerouting, weather conditions), people concerns (e.g., fights with other drivers, police enforcers, non-paying passengers, unfriendly passengers), jeepney problems (e.g., motor troubles, overheating), and lack of money.