# Eugenio, 2025
- the jeepney is a  symbol of Filipino ingenuity and resilience
- As a cornerstone of Philippine public transportation, they embody  the nation's creativity and communal spirit
- the jeepney's legacy as a symbol of Filipino  resourcefulness stems from its post-war transformation.
- As the "King of the Road," the  jeepney remains a globally recognized emblem of Filipino  culture, with the ongoing debate underscoring the need to  harmonize tradition and innovation while safeguarding this  vital aspect of Philippine heritage.
- According to Sir LJ, this  jeepney is frequently showcased at cultural events as a  testament to Filipino pride and craftsmanship.

# Bastos, 2008
- propose that the ‘jeepney,’ besides its nature as a ‘material of culture,’ could be taken as an example of a field-like, pleromatic iconic sign that is enriched with information and values, since it is, first of all, a vehicle of affective irradiation. In this sense, it is a semiotic device which carries social suggestions and promotes personal actions and goals.
- Another dimension that makes the authors’ approach interesting is the spotlight focused on street life. Jeepneys are a very familiar, important resource for many Filipinos in their everyday lives. Using them for transportation, Filipinos print on the jeepneys, literally, their own souls and many symbols about which they care.
- the quasi-photographic depiction of jeepneys enables the reader’s introduction to the daily experience of poor Filipinos as if it was a study in visual anthropology. The images—a resource that psychology should explore much more—surpass common language and open new perspectives, recording symbols and revealing worlds where religious (Manila) or aesthetic (Davao) symbols prevail. The focus on jeepneys as cultural artifacts renders Filipinos’ cultural realities more universally readable, transcending specificities of verbal language schemes.
- Filipinos’ notion of a self is more attached to the family than to the individual. The authors stress the insufficiency of the Philippines’ system of social protection, where the family is the main or the only source of security.
- Güss and Tuason (2008) assume jeepneys as ‘a material of culture’: a ‘substantial and concrete artifact of Filipinos’ beliefs and values’ (p. 216); in that sense, they are representations or vestiges of the lived world. Such representations of the world are hardly neutral; they are vehicles of social suggestions which promote personal actions and goals.
- As semiotic devices built by the drivers, jeepneys could be seen as a mediating resource with a potential for agency and novelty, interacting with the particular social and historical conditions prevailing in Davao or in Manila.
- And, yes: jeepneys are, as the authors say, a glimpse into Filipinos’ culture.

# Güss & Tuason, 2008
- Jeepneys are the most common mode of transportation in the Philippines. Modeled after the American jeep left behind during World War II, they were creatively modified by Filipinos.
- The jeepney can be seen as a human-made material object, a cultural artifact, because it reflects the beliefs and values operating at the time of its fabrication and decoration (Csikszentmihalyi & Halton, 1995; Tilley et al., 2006).
- Filipino values can be characterized as high collectivism (preference for acting as group members rather than as individuals), very high power distance (degree of acceptance of inequality), low uncertainty avoidance (preference for unstructured rather than structured situations), high masculinity (preference for values such as assertiveness and performance over those of warm personal relationships and service), and high short-term orientation (opposite of a long-term time orientation that stresses Confucian values like persistence).
- Javidan & House (2001) characterized the Philippines as very high on humane orientation, meaning that Filipinos try to avoid conflict in conversations and are caring and supportive. Smith et al. (2002) combined data from several value surveys and characterized Filipinos as high in power distance and conservatism, i.e., showing preference for the immediate circle over outsiders, maintaining the status quo, and loyalty towards one’s boss.
- Similarly, Inglehart and Baker (2000), in a study of 65 countries, characterized individuals from the Philippines as having high traditional (religion, national pride, and obedience to authority) and survival (economic and physical security) values.
- For Enriquez, the Filipino self is not an independent unity, but an interconnected unity with the selves of others or with the kapwa (the other). Thus, the Western concept of collectivism only captures a small aspect of kapwa. Among the more frequently mentioned values according to Enriquez (1977) were pakikisama (favoring smooth interpersonal relations), utang na loob (honoring debt of gratitude), and bahala na (determination in the face of uncertainty).
- As personality characteristics, Austin (as cited in Paredes, 1996, p. 243) mentioned utang kabubut-ón (debt of gratitude), pakikisama (camaraderie), and hiya (shame).
- A country’s means of transportation can reveal a poignant description of that society’s dynamic values and culture. In the Philippines, equivalent to the public bus or train system in other countries, the jeepney is the national mode of transportation
- When the US left the Philippines in 1945, thousands of jeeps were left behind, which creative Filipinos converted into jeepneys. The jeepneys crowd the streets, serving the people by transporting them to their destinations. One jeepney ride costs about P7.50 in Manila
- Although a jeepney offers seats for about 16 passengers, it is not unusual to see more than 20 passengers, with some people squatting and standing in the entrance or hanging on to the side. Jeepneys are also works of art. Decorating them is a collaborative effort of both jeepney owners and drivers. Painted in the brightest colors, inside and outside the vehicle, are stickers, advertisements, paintings, and inscriptions like ‘Jesus is always with you.’
- The jeepney is a substantial and concrete artifact of Filipinos’ beliefs and values, as evidenced by how it was created, the needs of the people it serves, and how it has become a means of transportation for everyday commuters. Conscious or unconscious, and intentional or not, the jeepney carries with it the meaning constructs of life in the Philippines. As a cultural article, it manifests, through its accessories and decorations, the values and sentiments of its passengers, owners, and especially drivers.
- Jeepneys are very colorful. In coding jeepneys’ dominant colors, we found that many colors were bright in hue to attract attention in the crowded streets.
- Greater competition to attract commuters may account for these differences. In Manila, there are more people, more routes, but also more jeepneys.
- the most frequent decorations were additional lights and sound accessories, for example sound systems(new laws, however, do not allow loud music and speakers in jeepneys.) followed by religious and aesthetic items. 
- Examples of aesthetic items were animal figurines, toys, crocheted curtains, and hanging CDs that reflected the sunlight to catch commuters’ attention. Crocheted curtains often separate the driver from the passengers’ area to give the driver a semblance of privacy while still allowing him to see the passengers and collect the money.
- Among the functional decorations were small fans, sampaguita flowers (jasmine, the national flower) and air fresheners, lights, small mirrors, and trash cans.
- Temperatures often reach 35 degrees Celsius (95 degrees Fahrenheit) and passengers are squeezed together in the limited space. Extra lights make it easier for the driver to see and be seen, especially during strong rains and at night, while mirrors in the front allow the driver to observe what passengers are doing in the back—specifically, if commuters alight without paying.
- Sometimes a driver hires someone to keep track of the passengers and collect fares, but usually he is alone. The jeepney driver is a splendid example of multitasking in action. While driving a manual transmission jeep in extreme conditions—traffic, heat, tropical rain—with bills organized by denomination between his fingers and coins in a small can close to the steering wheel, he stops to let people off and on, collects fares and gives exact change, and deals with occasional conflicts between passengers or with other drivers. The job is so challenging it is no wonder drivers feel the need for decorations to provide some sense of security and comfort.
- The jeepneys in Manila had stickers, paintings, and pictures with these subcategories: religion, politics, names, and advertisements
- There is a certain sense of readiness to face the challenges of everyday life, which is related to the Filipino value of bahala na (Pe-Pua & Protacio-Marcelino, 2000). When Filipinos say bahala na, it indicates a feeling that they can do their best when crises arise and a confidence in their ability to handle whatever form problems take.

## Religion
- Similar to the jeepneys’ decorations, religion was a dominant theme in the stickers, paintings, and pictures as well: for example, the Black Nazarene, the Sacred Heart of Jesus, Santo Niño (the child Jesus), and Our Lady of Manaoag (a town in the province of Pangasinan). There were also one-liners about reliance on God, such as ‘The Lord is my Shepherd,’ ‘In God we trust,’ and ‘God bless our trip.’ Several stickers alluded to some aspect of the Philippine Roman Catholic Church, like Couples for Christ, El Shaddai (a born again Catholic group), and angel stickers. The jeepneys’ array of stickers, paintings, and pictures show that religion is an integral part of the Filipino’s life. For drivers and passengers who see them every day, there is a mutual expressiveness of reliance on God. Being maka-Diyos (faithful to God) is reiterated when they see their struggles and difficulties in a hopeful light.
- Samples of religious items were crucifixes, small Buddha statues, rosaries, figurines of Santo Niño, Mary, and the saints, with phrases like ‘God bless our way.’
- Religious beliefs play an important role in Filipino life–religion acts as an anchor and a source of hope to survive destitution. Religious decorations serve as requests for protection against harm and guidance on the busy streets. The importance of religion is shown not only in the many religious items, but also in drivers’ actions. Often, drivers make the sign of a cross and mumble a short prayer at the start of their work day or when beginning a route, passing a church, or passing an accident. Passengers also get a sense of the driver’s religiosity through the jeepney’s decorations.

## Politics
- Another prevalent subcategory in stickers, pictures, and paintings was politics, for example ‘No to oil price hike’ and campaign ads for political candidates. Jeepney drivers, not exclusively, have an extensive awareness of politics and politicians as they understand the substantial impact both have on their everyday life, for example road conditions, food prices, jeepney fares, and so on. Out of nationalism or desperation, Filipinos are highly involved in the governmental institutions running the country. For instance, beginning in 1986, several non-violent manifestations successfully toppled presidents, that is, Ferdinand Marcos (the country’s dictator during a 20-year regime) and Joseph Estrada (who allegedly pocketed millions of pesos in excise taxes and bribes from illegal gambling syndicates). These demonstrations or People Power movements were attended by millions of Filipinos who prayed, held vigils, sang, and stayed in the streets until the incumbent president fled or stepped down. People Power movements attest to the Filipino’s pakikibaka (advocacy for change or some kind of rebellion) and pakikisama sa kapwa (cooperation with others). Filipinos believe and have experienced that as citizens they have a direct impact on political change.

## Family
- Names written on jeepneys abound, including names of drivers or owners (e.g., Armando, Roldan), their loved ones—spouses, parents, or children, (e.g., Rowena, Princess Vivienne)—coined names for the jeepney (e.g., Tagudin Express, Sitio Bagsik), or fabricated names that represent two or three people’s names combined (e.g., KhitJanLy, Pol-pog part 1). These names express regard, honor, or affection towards people significant in drivers’ lives. Names on jeepneys show a preference towards people (makatao) and the value of family relationships. They may signify toil and perseverance (pagsisikap) for someone or gratitude to someone (utang na loob).
- Family problems referred to relational concerns, such as conflicts with a partner, and responsibilities, such as not having enough time for family or providing for their family of origin.

## Advertisements
- Advertisements about cars (e.g., BMW, Lamborghini, Mercedes Benz) and other products (Guess, McDonald’s, Levi’s) display the Filipino’s colonial mentality, that is, an obvious preference for anything ‘Stateside’ and an inferiority complex over things made locally. The greater number of advertisements on Manila jeepneys compared to Davao jeepneys signifies an increased colonial mentality in Manila, an openness to assimilation from other cultures, and a greater valuing of material articles from abroad. Particularly in Manila, a jeepney with many of these ads can be regarded as ‘in’ or up-to-date.
- The importance of advertising the jeepney is not only recognized by drivers and owners, but also by the Philippine government. According to the May 6, 2006 issue of the Philippine Daily Inquirer, the government launched a new Jeepney Wrap Stickers program called Makisaya, Biyahe Na (Share the Joy, Take a Ride). Over 1,000 jeepneys will ‘get a fresh coat of paint’ provided by the Department of Tourism according to the LTFRB color codes. In turn, jeepneys have to put stickers showing tourist attractions.

## Poverty
- Regarding life problems, both Manila and Davao drivers identified financial (Manila 56%, Davao 40%), personal (Manila 14%, Davao 9%), and family problems (Manila 9%, Davao 21%), with both groups identifying financial issues as their biggest concern. Financial problems included not having enough money to pay for the education of their children, buy food, pay rent on their homes, and for needed repairs to the jeepney.
- Both Manila and Davao drivers generally identified one personal life problem, mainly health issues such as back pain or persistent coughing.
- Manila drivers were more expressive of personal concerns: ‘I worry about temptations of faith,’ ‘My hotheadedness is my concern.’
- The driver would like to earn more because he would like to pay for his children’s education, provide for enough food, and pay the rent. Manila drivers, in contrast, more frequently expressed financial problems. Manila is the center of the Philippines in terms of government, trade, economics, and commerce, and it is undeniable that people move to Manila to work on the supposition that it offers more job opportunities. 
- Thus, financial concerns are at the fore. The data also show that Manila drivers described more problems plausibly resulting from financial stress, for example health and fatigue.
- Worries about work and conflicts with others are often due to money. The focus on financial problems substantiates Inglehart and Baker’s research (2000), characterizing Filipinos as high in survival values. To the Filipino driver, being able to survive includes pagsisikap (perseverance), tiyaga (hard work), and the courage to continue to work and survive impoverished conditions. Drivers frequently expressed the constant need to earn money; determination to work long hours; and the boldness and courage, bahala na, to put food on the table in any way possible.

## Transport Poverty
- The jeepney drivers reported work-related issues: bad road conditions (e.g., traffic congestion, rerouting, weather conditions), people concerns (e.g., fights with other drivers, police enforcers, non-paying passengers, unfriendly passengers), jeepney problems (e.g., motor troubles, overheating), and lack of money.

# Menez, 1998
- concerns decorated vehicles as a vital form of contemporary urban folklore
- It also examines the role of jeepney drivers as “urban specialists’—occupationally specialized groups with particular expertise in urban ways—in cultural innovation and the transmission of urban traditions.
- Writers cite the jeepney’s stature as a national icon, as evidenced by its representation in the fine arts and the mass media, and by the importation of the vehicle itself to international expositions.
- The true cause of the traffic congestion is an obsolete city plan for a rapidly exploding population.
- The majority of commuters—students, laborers, and office workers—depend on these low-fare vehicles which are easily available on nearly every street corner.
- American military jeep of World War II vintage into a gaily decorated public utility jeepney
- Most of the work, from body building to customized painting, is done by skilled craftsmen and artists in family-run enterprises which pride themselves in rendering personalized service. After the jeepney leaves the shop, the owner, as well as the driver who leases it from him, purchases or makes the ornaments and hand-paints the inscriptions whenever inspired to do so. Over the years, the owners and drivers change or replenish the decorations, or simply keep adding them until there is no room for anything else. The result is a highly individualized assemblage.
- A thematic analysis of jeepney folk art and inscriptions reveals some of the major concerns of jeepney drivers. An inventory of the vehicle’s ornaments yields the following dominant motifs: love and sex, driving speed, economic success, religion, and family. Predominantly displayed decals of scantily-clad females come from popular comic books, but the assemblage of assorted objects representing speed is original jeepney art: chrome miniature wings, missiles and winged horses on the hood, paintings of birds and airplanes on the sides, and long colorful plastic streamers that fly in the wind as the jeep zooms in and out of traffic. A radio and cassette tape deck—familiar symbols of economic success—blare out the latest popular tunes; there may even be a small television set. Such “special effects” are intended to attract the commuter and to impress upon the public that the driver is not only economically successful but also au courant. Paintings of rural scenes are often commissioned by the owners, and curtains crocheted by the women, are reminiscent of village homes. 
- Jeepney inscriptions corroborate the thematic emphases in the folk art motifs; the sample studied showed the following distribution: love and sex (27 percent), economic success (13 percent), driving speed (12 percent), religion (8 percent), and the family (8 percent). The rest of the inscriptions are devoted to the overseas dream (7 percent), titles of movies, television shows, and popular songs (7 percent), ethnicity and nationalism (6 percent), memoranda to the riders (3 percent) and a miscellany of minor themes (7 percent). 

## Religion
- A central place is as signed to religious paraphernalia—rosary beads, assorted medals and holy pictures, a miniature altar dedicated to the Christ Child or the Virgin Mary, garlanded with fresh and dried flowers, and adorned with electric votive lights.
- In 1984, a sudden plethora of jeepney slogans like “Praise the Lord,” “Christ is the Lord,” and “The New Kingdom” announced a new religious trend in a predominantly Catholic country. Charismatic movements and American evangelism enthralled a packed coliseum night after night in Metropolitan Manila.

## Immigration
- The emigrant experience has been a popular theme in recent years. Such jeepney signs as “Texan,” “Pride of Algeria,” and “California Dream” (with a painting of the Golden Gate Bridge) reflect not only a fondness for high status foreign names but more significantly the driver’s dream of a better life in foreign lands. However, the lower class emigrant, or contract worker, learns that the pursuit of this dream means loneliness, as in Anak ng Desierto [Child of the Desert], “Homesick vs. Dollar,” as well as harsh working conditions, Init at Lamig ng Saudi [The Heat and Cold of Saudi (Arabia)]. The emigrant’s hardearned income is used to pay for a home, start a business or buy a jeep which now carries the sign, Katas ng Kuwait, (Saudi, Iran, Nigeria ...) [Sap or “Sweat” of Kuwait, etc]..

## Drug Subculture
- Ever sensitive to the cultural pulse of the city, the jeepney driver easily assimilates new influences. The drug subculture, for instance, has recently contributed the following signs: Tikoy “60 cc” (nickname for Trecodin, a cough syrup containing codeine), Lakbay Isip [Roaming Imagination], and simply “Cocaine.” 

## Politics
- Political slogans are much less evident on commercial vehicles; in a country where politics is an explosively controversial topic, Manila’s drivers almost never advertise their political opinions on their jeeps. 
- The only exception, noted in 1984, during the repressive regime of Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos, was the sign, Katas ng Sariling Sikap [Sap or “Sweat” of Self-Help], a seemingly innocent variant of the popular Katas ngIran, etc., signs. It was actually a spoof on the government slogan, Sariling Sikap [Self-Help], which was Madame Marcos’s rallying cry to promote prosperity for all citizens through self-help projects. 

# Progressivism
- Jeepney drivers and other urban subcultural groups such as teenage gangs and homosexuals are acknowledged creators as well as users of urban slang, which changes so rapidly that by the time linguistic fads reach provincial towns, new ones have appeared in television and radio commercials, cartoons, and jeepney inscriptions. 

## Advertisment
- Through their vehicles, jeepney drivers effectively disseminate not only these catch phrases but also new ideas: Jeepneys while reflecting advertising’s influence are themselves becoming a medium of mass communication. Advertisers like to use them as non-traditional media because of the low cost. *From personal correspondence with Alexis Q. Mefiez, 5 October 1984.*
- The following example illustrates the drivers’ creative use of advertising slogans. It also shows how jeepney inscriptions approximate the dialogic nature of graffiti. The inscriptions found on two different jeeps derive from the commercials for two competing laundry detergents—Ajax and Superwheel. 
- The first, “King Size! Lalong pinalaki, lalong pinatigas [Made bigger, made harder], is a direct quote from the Ajax detergent bar advertisement. 
- The second is a play on the Superwheel television commercial which features Cleopatra of the Nile (acted by a popular Afro-Filipino comedienne). Despairing over a pile of Anthony’s dirty laundry, “Cleo” cries out, Magpatuka na lang ako sa ahas [I might as well be bitten by an asp]. The jeepney slogan, siksik ka nga sa tigas pero magpatuka na lang ako sa ahas [You're so tight and hard but I might as well be bitten by an asp] is ostensibly Superwheel’s response to the Ajax advertisement, but few would miss its sexual connotations.

## Language
- Linguistic play is a prominent feature in Philippine languages (Conklin, 1956, 1959; Marasigan, 1986; Sibayan, 1985), and by extension, its jeepney inscriptions, enriched by the multilingual resources of the city, which the drivers exploit with remarkable facility. Jeepney inscriptions use the three dominant languages in the nation’s capital—Tagalog (on which the national language, Pilipino, is based), English (which is still considered an official language), and Taglish (a mixture of the two languages). Typically “mix-mix,” as Taglish is also known|, is the sign, “No parking” sa hindi mo “darling” [Don’t park with someone whois not your darling]. Literal translations of Tagalog slang into English like the sign, “Left—turning Lover” [unfaithful lover] *Jeepney drivers speak Tagalog but typically have learned some English in elementary school and from the media.*
- Their favorite form of verbal manipulation is the transposition of syllables, Erfat [Father], or letters, Jeprocks, Jeeprox, Jeffrox, etc., for “Projects” [Jeprocts]. Punning is also used with words or sounds from Tagalog, English, and Spanish, as in “God knows Hudas not pay.” [Tagalog/Spanish, pronounced “who does” for the Biblical traitor Judas Iscariot]. 
- The superimposition of native and foreign words on one another has produced such signs as “tSuperman”  [tsuper: driver] and MACHOnurin [Macho + masunurin, obedient].
- Jeepney signs are ideal for the double or triple entendre which depends on its visual representation. In “CHICKSeater,” a word not usually used in this form in the English language, “Chicks” may be the American slang for girls, or it may also refer to balut [chicken or duck egg embryo], a favorite delicacy popularly believed to increase male potency. Reading both meanings simultaneously creates a highly erotic metaphor. At the same time, the sign can be interpreted as an innocent play on “two-seater.”
- The content and style of these linguistic, as well as artistic, innovations reflect the flamboyance, earthy humor, satiric wit, and daredevil driving style of their creators. These “kings of the road” live and work according to their philosophy, “Work hard, enjoy hard,” which underlies their competitive strategies for achieving power and status. 
- Jeepney messages often offer advice couched in rhymes with double meanings like the following examples seen on three different vehicles:  
	- Basta kabit, may sabit [If you hang on, you'll get caught (snagged)] 
	- Puede kabit, puera sabit [You may hang on, but don’t get caught] 
	- Puede singit, huwag ipit [You may cut in, but don’t get caught in between] ^1f1c99
- The first two slogans ostensibly warn passengers about the danger of hanging on to the handle in the rear entrance of the jeepney while trying to board the vehicle. The third slogan is addressed to other drivers about the risks of cutting in. 
## Lamangan
- The most important of these is lamangan [one-upmanship], which generally refers to the strategy for besting one’s opponent in any kind of contest. However, to the jeepney driver, it is a game which governs not only his driving behavior but also his pursuit of the good life.
- To the jeepney driver, one-upmanship pertains primarily to the acquisition of road space. Driving is a constant competition for space, with each driver bent on edging out his competitors to avoid being obstructed (Stone, 1973).
- Driving is also an economic competition, for the driver’s daily income depends upon the number of passengers he can transport to their destinations. He weaves in and out of traffic, his eyes alternately on the road, on the look-out for potential customers, and on his passengers getting on or off his vehicle; with one hand on the wheel, the other collecting fares and handing out change, and intermittently wiping off his sweat with a rag tied around his neck, the jeepney driver is indeed the highly pressured urbanite in the marketplace of city streets. As one driver wrote on his jeep, “Jingle” lang ang pahinga [We rest only when we piss].
- The use of elegant titles is another manifestation of the competition for social status. Such jeepney names as “Jeepney King II,” “Road Emperor,” “Jason the King,” “Prince William,” and “Denis D’Great” state the drivers’ playful attempts to affiliate with royalty. If one is a “Millionaire Forever,” the other is a “Socialite Forever.” Even such signs as Solong Anak [Only Child] and Heredero [Heir] express some form of social one-upmanship. They refer to the special treatment accorded an only child or a sole heir who never had to do without the basic necessities of life. Laki sa Layaw: Jeeprox (Raised in Luxury: Jeeprox] is a variant of the refrain from a popular song “Jeprocks” [Projects] about the self-indulgent children of suburbia. Like the elegant titles above, these allusions to a privileged childhood are the driver’s fantasy.

## Art
- Juxtaposed with this portrayal of the relentless struggle for economic survival is the ostentatious, uninhibited style of jeepney folk art. According to Emmanuel Torres, the excessive embellishments are due to horror vacui, “a fear of empty space, that seemingly compulsive filling up of every square inch of surface commonly observed in popular visual arts,” resulting in modern rococo decor. 
- Jeepney drivers, however, have a different interpretation. One gave this typical explanation: “A jeepney is just like a woman who loves beautiful clothes. If we do well we dress her up.” This analogy is also found in such inscriptions as “A jeepney without a driver is like a woman without a lover,” and its recent variant, “A chick without a lover is like a Mazda without a stereo.” 
- This intimate identification with the vehicle as an extension of the driver’s personality emphasizes the jeepney’s function as a status symbol. As another driver pointed out, “If the driver is prosperous, so is his jeep.” The quantity and quality of decorative objects provide a gauge of the driver’s economic status. A jeep with six or eight chrome statuettes of Pegasus is deemed superior to one with only two or three chrome horses. One-upmanship is the name of the game.

## Sex
- The most important area of competition is sex. A common stereotype of the jeepney driver, well accepted by themselves, is that of the great lover, “Lady Killer,” “Chick Hunter,”, “I am the greatest.” The image of the great lover is also associated with economic success as a driver. 
- However, [[#^1f1c99|all the three cautionary messages]] also allude to the hazards involved in extramarital affairs. A kabit [clinger] in Tagalog slang is a mistress; a singit [wedge] is the third party in a love triangle.
- Extramarital affairs are a favorite topic for jeepney commentary. A common term for cheating on one’s spouse or lover is the Tagalog slang kumakaliwa [literally, making a left turn]. Everyone knows therefore, that the sign Huwag kaliwa on a jeepney does not literally mean “Do not make a left turn.” 
- Another word for unfaithful is kalewete [literally, left-handed], which appears in a driver’s prayer, Dios ko, iligtas mo po ako sa babaeng kalewete [My God, deliver me from a “left-handed” woman]. 
- Once more, the concept of lamangan [one upmanship] is applicable here since, as mentioned previously, the number of mistresses a driver can afford to keep is supposedly a gauge of his social status. Furthermore, a great lover should also be able to “cut in” or take away someone’s wife or lover. In a society with a double standard of sexual morality, it is usually the man who gets away with extramarital affairs. Theoretically, however, in cultural terms it is the “left-handed” wife of a “left-turning” husband who should ultimately win the game of one-upmanship.
- A number of these messages are reminders to pay one’s fare, “Pay as you enter,” “Forget everything but not your fare.” Some are warnings about occupying more space than warranted, like the caption on a sticker showing a half naked lady with her legs crossed, Kaunting ipit, baka po masilip ng mga matang mainit [Cross your legsa little tighter, these “hot” eyes might take a peek].
- Female passengers are often the target of these inscriptions, as in the following rhymes: ^ad1602
	- Pag sexy, libre [If you’re sexy, you're free] 
	- Pag taba, doble [If you're fat, your fare is double] 
	- Pag pangit, triple [If you’re ugly, your fare is triple]
- or more creatively, “You lost your virginity in my imagination.” Such aggressive language against women ordinarily would be intolerable; here, however, these messages are not meant to be taken seriously, so that what might be viewed as offensive in other contexts generally passes censorship, like the following “antisocial” rhymes seen on two different vehicles:
	- Di nais ko na kayo ay pigilin, ngunit ang utot ay masamang hangin [It is not my wish to stop you, But a fart is bad wind].  
	- Pigilin ang pagutot, nang ang hangin ay di bumantot [Suppress your fart In order not to foul the air].

## Relief from Urban Life
- Jeepney inscriptions are rhetorical devices for attaining social and material gains. They are addressed not only to fellow motorists but also to everyone else on the street, especially prospective passengers. Just as the rich ornamentation is intended to attract the more discerning commuters, these messages are meant to entice the potential rider, thus, Kung nais mo ay ligaya, sa akin ka sumakay/sumama [If happiness is your desire, ride with me (variant: go out with me)], and to provide entertainment for the duration of the ride. The driver in turn has an appreciative audience

> When you ride the Philippine jeepney, you don’t read a newspaper. You read the jeepney itself. For a jeepney is graffiti; it is the driver’s advertisement for himself. All those prayers, mottos, proverbs, captions and one-liners that clutter up the dashboard are meant to communicate this fact: that the driver with his back to you is a man, he is alive, and like his vehicle, he is unique. *Nestor Torre, “The Jeepney as Literature,” Archipelago 1:4 (1974): 6.*

- [[#^ad1602|These messages]] are instead intended to relieve some of the tensions generated by the frenetic pace of urban life: the competition for passengers on the part of the driver, the competition for a ride on the part of the commuter, and for all who work and live on city streets, environmental pressures such as the extreme tropical heat, the fumes from the vehicles, and the hazards and aggravations of frequently flooded streets. 
- As city dwellers—drivers and passengers—battle with the impossible traffic in Manila’s congested streets, jeepney folk art and inscriptions provide a relief from what would otherwise be a grim battlefield. As Alan Dundes and Carl Pragter point out: “While urban life may produce alienation, it also generates urban folklore to help make the ills and pressures of modern society just a little bit more bearable.” (Dundes & Pagter, 1976)

# Cabilin, 2025
- Bahagi ng buhay nating mga Pilipino ang dyip. Maaaring buong buhay ng isang pasahero ay gumagamit nito sa pagpasok at sa pag-uwi bilang transportasyon.
- Sa dyip ay lutang ang pag-uugaling pakikipagkapwa na itinuturing na sentro o pinakamahalaga sa mga pagpapahalaga ng mga Pilipino sa perspektiba ng Sikolohiyang Pilipino. Pinasinayaan ang larang na ito ni Virgilio Enriquez noong unang bahagi ng 1970 upang isulong ang pag-aaral sa sikolohiyang bunga ng karanasan, kaisipan at oryentasyong Pilipino sa gitna ng kaisipang nalulukuban ng pananaw na Kanluranin sa bansa (Enriquez, 2015).
- Samakatuwid, sentro ng larang na ito ang pagpapayaman ng diwa (psyche) ng Pilipino na may pagkiling sa konsepto ng kapwa. Ang kapwa ay ang pagsasama ng “sarili” at “iba” sapagkat mayroong pagkilala ito sa pagbabahagi ng pagkakakilanlan.
- Ang konsepto ng kapwa ay hindi usaping pansarili lamang, ito rin ay pakikipag-ugnayan at pakikipagdamayan. Ayon kay Dagmang (1996), ang Pinoy kapag may gustong sabihin ay nagpapadama; kapag may gustong malaman ay nakikiramdam. Sa diskurso naman gamit ang lente ng pilosopiya tungkol sa kapwa, tiningnan ito bilang kaugnay at hindi maaaring ilayo sa higit na pagkaunawa hinggil sa tao (Mabaquiao, 2018).
- Kung mayroong ituturing na pinakamahalagang elemento sa dyip, ito ay walang iba kung hindi ang tao na pasahero nito. Sa kanya nag-ugat ang dahilan kung bakit nabuo ang dyip
- Masasalamin na ang pasahero ay sabjek kung saan alam niya ang kanyang patutunguhan at dahilan kung bakit siya sumakay sa dyip. Mayroon siyang direksyon at layuning binubuo habang pinagmamasdan ang mga kaganapan sa loob at labas ng dyip. Bahagi ng direksyon niya ay magpamalas ng etika sa kapwa pasahero at drayber kagaya ng pag-aabot ng pamasahe, ang magalang na pagsasabi ng “po” at kung papara para bumaba. Isa itong malinaw na pagpapamalas ng pakikipagkapwa-tao.
- Mahalagang sangkap ang unawa sa pagpapanatili ng kaayusan at ugnayang nabubuo sa bawat isang kabahagi ng dyip. Bunga ito ng pagiging likas sa pakikipagkapwa-tao ng mga Pilipino sa ibang-tao o hindi ibang-tao.
- Isang patunay ang pag-usog sa upuan upang bigyang espasyo ang iba sa pag-upo. Idagdag pang hinihinaan ng drayber ang kanyang radyo sa tuwing may nakikita at nadidinig siyang pasaherong seryosong nakikipag-usap sa telepono. 
- Sa mga ganitong halimbawa, kitang-kita kung paanong ang unawa ay normal at hindi madalas na kailanganing ipaalala pa para ito ay ipakita at ipadama. Sa dyip ay mailalarawan ang mga pagpapahalagang Pilipino mula sa pag-unawa sa konsepto ng pakikipagkapwa-tao.
- Ayon kay Timbreza mula sa panayam nina Villejo at Liwanag (2019): Sa pamamagitan ng ‘ika nga’y pagninilay tungkol sa negatibong pag-uugali ng mga Pilipino, naunawaan din natin ang pagkataong Pilipino. Naipalalabas at napauunawa natin ang iba’t ibang pag-uugali ng mga Pilipino, maging positibo man o negatibo – nabubuksan ang pagkatao ng taumbayan. Naipapakita ang kahinaan at kakulangan hindi para siraan sa ibang tao, kundi para mapaunawa ang mga kahinaan at kakulangan bilang tao at ang mga positibo at mabubuting kalooban na mas kinakailangan mapalakas at mapaunlad. Ang puntong ito ay pinahalagahan sa pag-aaral upang lubos na maipahayag ang parehas na positibo at negatibong ugali ng mga pasahero sa loob ng dyip na mas lalong nagpalutang sa pagbubuo ng kapwa sa kapwa pasahero ng dyip.
- Ayon kay Matienzo (2021), ang karanasang ito ay sumasalamin sa panlipunang ugnayan, pagpapahalaga sa pagpapakatao at mga aral na natatangi lamang sa transportasyong ito. Ang dyip ay isang behikulo para personal na makita ang panlipunang ugnayan hindi lamang ng drayber sa kapwa niya drayber, ang drayber at ang pasahero, kung hindi lalo na ang pasahero sa kapwa niya pasahero. Tao ang pinakasentro ng pag-aaral na ito sapagkat berbal man o di-berbal ay mababakas sa tao ang konkretong mundong kanyang nararamdaman sa kanyang kapwa tao.

## Bayad Po
- Karaniwan sa naitalang mga datos na ibinigay ng mga lalabintaunin ang pag-aabot ng bayad papunta sa drayber mula sa sino mang kapwa pasahero sa dyip. Tinawag nila itong “normal” na gawain ng mga Pilipino sa dyip dahil tila wala namang pagpipilian ang sino man na malapit sa drayber upang mag-abot ng bayad. Wala namang nakapaskil o nag-uutos sa kanila upang iabot ang bayad subalit likas na ito sa pag-uugaling Pilipino. Sa aksyon ng pagbabayad hawak ang pera ay tanda at alam na ng kapwa pasahero kung para saan at ano ang gagawin sa iniaabot kasabay ng “makikisuyo o pakisuyo”, “po”, at “salamat po” na tanda ng paggalang.
- Ang pagkuha o pagtanggap ng bayad mula sa kapwa pasahero ay tanda ng kanilang pagrespeto, matanda man o bata. Mayroong koneksyong nabubuo ang nagbabayad at tumatanggap kahit may pagkakataong mayroong ibang ginagawa ang pinag-aabutan ng bayad tulad kung may kausap na iba, nakatingin sa ibang anggulo, nakapikit o nakikinig ng musika. Itinuturing na isang unspoken language o wikang hindi na dapat sambitin ang gawain ng pagaabot ng bayad sa dyip ayon sa isang lalabintaunin.
- Inobserbahan din ang katapatan ng bawat isang kapwa pasahero sa dyip lalo na sa halaga ng ibabayad at ibabalik na sukli. Ayon sa mga lalabintauning nakausap ay wala pa silang karanasan na hindi nagbayad ng tapat at tumanggap ng kulang na sukli. Mayroong dalawang galawan ng perang pambayad sa dyip: una, mula sa pasahero na hindi palaging sakto ang bitbit na bayad, walang barya o buo ang pera kahit pa may malaking karatulang “barya lang po sa umaga”; ikalawa, ang sukli ng pasahero mula sa drayber. Sa parehas na galaw ay pinagpapasa-pasahan ito ng mga kapwa pasahero lalo na kung marami ang nakasakay. Sa huli, wasto ang kanilang bayad at nakukuhang sukli. Ipinapamalas ng ganitong gawain ang katapatan ng bawat isang kapwa pasahero sa dyip. Barya man kung titingnan ang nasasalat na pera sa tuwing nag-aabot ng bayad, pinatutunayan pa rin ang likas na kabutihan at katapatan ng mga Pilipino lalo na sa kapwa nito.

## "Pára po sa Tabi"
- Parehas sa pag-aabot ng bayad na ginagamitan ng pasalita at pakilos na paraan ang isa pang maka-Pilipinong katangian ng pakikipagkapwa sa dyip, ang pagpára tuwing sasakay at/o bababa ng dyip.
- Ang salitang pára ay paghinto sa paggalaw ng isang sasakyan gaya ng dyip. Sa pagsasabi ng pára ay itatabi ng drayber ang dyip sa gilid upang bumaba o sumakay rito ang pasahero. Nakukuha agad ng drayber ang mensahe ng pagpára sa tuwing malakas at malinaw na sinasabi ito
- Sa di-berbal na pagpára naman ay nakita ito ng mga lalabintauning sa porma ng pagtapik sa bubong ng dyip upang makabuo ng tunog. Isang senyales ang nabubuong tunog para sa drayber na mayroong bababa ng dyip. Isinasagawa ito gamit ang daliri o kaya ay barya sabay itinutuktok ito sa bakal na hawakan upang makabuo ng tunog-senyales. Isa pang diberbal ay ang paghatak ng tali sabay pag-ilaw naman ng bombilya katapat ng drayber. Sa kabila nito, karaniwan pa ring ginagamit ang pagsasabi ng “pára po sa tabi” at ang paggawa ng tunog-senyales.
- Masasalamin sa dalawang maka-Pilipinong katangian ang pagtutunguhan ng bawat isa sa dyip. Espesipikong nabubuo ang konsepto ng kapwa sa pakikitungong ginagawa tuwing nag-aabot ng bayad at sukli gayundin ang pagtulong sa pagpára. May mga pagkakataong nagsasarili ang isa subalit hindi maiwasan ng kapwa pasahero na makialam bilang pagtulong sa kapwa pasahero. Makikita sa pagtulong ang pakikisalamuha ng pasahero sa kapwa pasahero.

## Tinginan at Pakiramdaman
- Para sa mga nakakuwentuhang lalabintaunin, pare-parehas silang nagiging mapagmatyag sa kanilang paligid sa dyip. Tinitingnan ang mga taong nakasakay o sasakay sa dyip kung kanilang kakilala o hindi.
- Karaniwan ang eksena na may natutulog sa dyip tuwing gabi lalo na kapag rush hour o oras ng uwian ng mga nag-oopisina at estudyante. Ang pagtulog o pag-idlip ay tanda ng kanilang pagod sa gawain sa buong araw. Sa ganitong mga pagkakataon, matinding makiramdam ang maraming kapwa nila pasahero batay sa obserbasyon ng mga lalabintaunin. Ipinapamalas ito sa hindi masyadong paggalaw, paghina ng boses kung may kausap at paggising sa kapwa pasaherong napasarap ng tulog subalit kailangan ng bumaba. May mga hindi rin nakaiwas na sumandal sa katabi habang natutulog at pinapabayaan na lamang.
- Sa mga pasaherong maraming bitbit o dalahin, may akay na mga bata, at sa mga matatanda o persons with disability (PWD) ay may nagbibigay agad ng espasyo para makaupo at makatulong sa kanyang kapwa pasahero. Karaniwang sa unahang bahagi sa pag-akyat sila pinauupo o malapit sa drayber. Wala pang naging danas ang mga lalabintaunin na pasaherong hindi nagbigay ng tulong sa kapwa nila pasahero na nasa ganitong sitwasyon. Naobserbahan din ng mga lalabintaunin ang bilis ng pakiramdam ng drayber sa loob ng dyip. Halimbawa kapag may kausap ang isang pasahero sa dyip, agarang hinihinaan ng drayber ang kanyang radyo tanda ng kanyang pakikiramdam at pag-unawa sa sitwasyon.
- Tulad ng maka-Pilipinong katangian na pagbabayad at pagpára sa dyip ay makikita ang antasan ng pagtutunguhan na pakikitungo, pakikisalamuha, at pakikilahok. Ang mga ito ay karaniwang ginagamitan muna ng tinginan at pakiramdaman hanggang sa matarok ang ganoong klase ng pagtutunguhan. Maituturing ngayon na unang bahagi ang maka-Pilipinong katangian na tinginan at pakiramdaman upang maisakatuparan ang nasabing tatlong antasan ng pagtutunguhan.

## Kuwentuhan
- Ang bawat tinginan at pakiramdaman ng mga pasahero sa dyip ay nagbubunsod ng aksyon upang kumonekta sa kapwa pasahero gaya ng kuwentuhan o usapan. Ang kuwentuhan ay likas sa mga Pilipino sapagkat hilig natin ang pakikialam at pakikisangkot.
- Pansin ng mga lalabintaunin na isang espasyo ang dyip para sa pagbubukas ng kuwentuhan.
- Ganitong-ganito napansin ng mga lalabitaunin nagsisimula ang kuwentuhan sa dyip lalo na sa mga matatanda. Ayon sa kanila ay mayroong taglay na awtoridad ang matatanda kaya patuloy lang sila sa pagsasalita o pagkukuwento ng kanilang saloobin hinggil sa isang paksa. 
	- Pagbabahagi ng isang lalabintaunin, karaniwang paksa na naririnig niya ay tungkol sa napapanahong usapin ng bansa lalo sa politika at ekonomiya. 
	- Isang halimbawa ng paksa ay tungkol sa patuloy na pagtaas ng presyo ng bilihin na iniugnay sa kanyang nararanasang hirap pampinansyal; 
	- at hirap pisikal na iniinda dahil sa edad ng mga matatandang pasahero na nagkukuwentuhan. 
	- Nagsimula ito bilang isang komento mula sa napakinggang balita sa radyo na sinundan pa ng isang komento mula sa kapwa pasahero. 
	- Ang palitan ng kanilang komento ay may kalakasan ng kanilang boses kaya naengganyo ang iba pang kapwa pasahero na makisali sa naging kuwentuhan.
- Masasalamin sa pagsasahalimbawa na ibinahagi ng lalabintaunin kung paanong ang danas ng isa ay maaaring maging danas din ng iba. Isang pagkakataon ito para sa kolektibong pagsang-ayon o maaaring pagsalungat na naging punto ng paksa para sa kuwentuhan. Natigil lamang ang kuwentuhan nang bumaba na ang matandang pasahero sa dyip. Ang saglit na kuwentuhan ay may mahaba nang nilakbay na konsepto sa pagbubuo ng kapwa mula sa kapwa pasahero. Ang pagiging ibang-tao nito ay sumalamin sa pakikibagay mula sa danas na pinagdadaanan ng matanda. Hindi man parehas ang estado, edad, at danas ng bawat isang nagkukwentuhan; naroon pa rin ang pagiging isa ng bawat isa dahil sa pakikipagkapwa. Ang kuwentuhan ay nagiging tulay sa pagpasok ng iba sa buhay ng iba kaya nakikita ang unawa sa isa’t isa.
- Nakakikilig namang ibinahagi ng isa pang lalabintaunin ang kanyang danas ng pakikipagkuwentuhan sa dating kaklase noong senior hayskul na muling nagkita sa dyip habang pauwi mula sa España sa Maynila. Ang tagal ng kanilang byahe at kuwentuhan sa dyip ay simula na pala ng kanilang pag-iibigan. Hindi lubos maisip ng nagbahaging lalabintaunin na sa dyip niya muling matatagpuan ang dating kaklase at mabubuo ang kanilang relasyon. Mula sa dulong bahagi ng dyip malapit sa drayber ay lumipat ito sa kanyang tabi at nagsimulang bumati at makipagkumustahan. Lumalim ang usapan tungkol sa kasalukuyang pinagkakaabalahan at gawain sa eksuwelahan. Nagtapos din ang kanilang relasyon ng halos isa at kalahating taon.
- Naging kuwentuhan din ang mga alagang hayop na ibinahagi ng isa pang lalabintaunin. Nagpapalitan sila ng mga impormasyon tungkol sa murang bilihan ng pagkain at gamit, mga paunang lunas kapag may sakit, at karanasan sa kanilang pag-aalaga. Saglit man ang nagiging kuwentuhan, naging interesante naman ito para sa kapwa pasahero sapagkat kitang kita nila ang hilig at ugnayan nila sa isa’t isa dahil sa gawaing pag-aalaga ng hayop.
- Parehas na para sa ibang-tao at hindi ibang-tao ang gawaing kuwentuhan sa loob ng dyip. Nagiging inklusibong gawain ito para sa lahat depende sa kagustuhan na maging bahagi ng usapan. Danas ang antasan ng pagtutunguhan gaya ng pakikiisa, pakikisangkot at pakikipagpalagayang-loob. Maliit man ang espasyo at oras sa tagpuan ng mga lalabintaunin, naging baon naman nila ang indikasyong nagpalapot sa kanilang pagkaunawa sa konsepto ng kapwa mula sa kapwa pasahero.

## Limos at Malasakit
- Naibahagi ng mga lalabintaunin na mayroon pa ring pakikipagkapwa kahit sa maliit na paraan. Mas nagkaroon ng dating sa kanya ang pagbibigay ng limos sa dyip kumpara sa mga pulubing nabibigyan niya sa kalsada. Nagkaroon siya ng mas malalim na pagtingin sa halaga ng pagaabot tulong dahil nasaksihan niya rin sa kapwa pasahero ang pakikipagkapwa.
- Ang pagiging malapit sa isa’t isa ng mga pasahero sa kapwa pasahero ay dulot na rin ng istruktura ng dyip na may maliit na espasyo sa gitna at magkakaharap na upuan na nagpapalalim ng pagtingin ng bawat isa upang mabuo ang pakikipagkapwa. Kaya ang pagtulong sa kapwa ay nakahahawa sa loob ng dyip na nag-uugat sa maka-Pilipinong kaugalian ng hiya at pakikisama
- Naniniwala ang Pilipino na dapat kumikilos siya batay sa kung ano ang mga katanggap-tanggap na kaugalian ng lipunan. Lumilitaw rito ang damdamin ng pagkahiya sa mga katapat at katabing kapwa pasahero na nag-abot ng limos kung magsasawalang kibo na lamang siya gayong dumaan pa sa harapan ng mukha niya o ipinaabot sa kanya ang limos, nag-abot ng limos kung magsasawalang kibo na lamang siya gayong dumaan pa sa harapan ng mukha niya o ipinaabot sa kanya ang limos, pagtatapat ng isa sa mga lalabintaunin. Mula sa hiya ay nabubuo sa kanyang pagkatao ang ugali ng pakikisama sapagkat gusto niyang magkaroon ng maganda at mabuting pakikitungo sa iba. Dahil nagbigay ang iba, makikisama na rin siyang mag-abot ng barya. Masasabing totoong may nagaganap na bayanihan sa loob ng dyip hindi lamang sa paabot-abot o pagpapasa ng bayad mula sa hulihan ng dyip papunta sa drayber kundi may bayanihan din sa pagbibigay-limos sapagkat nagkakasama-sama ang mga pasahero sa pagtulong sa nangangailangan. Hindi na siya nagiging ibang tao sa loob ng dyip kundi kapwa tao na nakikiisa at nakikisama sa kapwa pasahero.
- Ngayon ay nagiging kapwa pasahero na hindi ibang-tao sapagkat makikita na sa kanya ang kabaitan, pagkakawanggawa, at pagiging handa sa pagtulong sa iba na likas sa Pilipino. Bukod sa pakikiabot ng bayad, may ilang pagkakataon din na naranasan ng lalabintaunin na may nagtanong sa kanya na kapwa pasahero kung magkano ang tamang pamasahe papunta sa isang lugar, kung madadaanan ng dyip ang kanilang pupuntahan o mga saglitang kuwentuhan at palitan ng opinyon.
- Nandoon ang pantay na pagtingin niya sa kapwa pasahero na pareho silang mga karaniwang komyuter kahit na magkakaiba sila ng estado sa buhay. Para sa kanya, kapag may nakakausap siyang kapwa pasahero ay ramdam niya ang kanyang pagiging normal na tao sapagkat unti-unti na siyang bumubuo ng pagtitiwala sa kapwa dahil sa pakikipagpalagayang loob niya sa kapwa pasahero sa dyip.
- Sa puwesto ng upuan sa dyip ng mga pasaherong lalabintaunin ay kakikitaan pa rin ito ng bigayan na walang hinihinging kapalit. Ito ay patunay na likas sa Pilipino ang pakikipagkapwa kahit hindi ito idikta. Sa simpleng pagkilos ng pasahero ay kakikitaan pa rin ng pakikipagkapwa sa pamamagitan ng pagbibigayan kahit na sa tagpuan ng punuan sa dyip. Mapatutunayan sa naging danas na sa pamamagitan ng pakikiramdam sa kapwa nila pasahero ay may pangangailangan na sila ay magbigay at ang pagbibigay sa kapwa ay malinaw na indikasyon ng pakikipagkapwa.

## Pagwawalang Bahala
- Likas na sa mga Pilipino ang ugaling walang pakialam na nag-ugat sa pagsasawalang bahala sa kanilang kapwa at kitang kita ito sa mga ilang eksena sa loob ng dyip ayon sa obserbasyon ng mga lalabintaunin. Wala sa edad ayon sa mga lalabintaunin ang pagsasawalang bahala sa loob ng dyip. Karaniwan dito ay ang nakikitang madalas na pagbibingi-bingihan o walang pakialam sa kapwa pasaherong nakikiusap na maibigay ang kanyang bayad sa drayber ng dyip na malayo sa kanyang kinauupuan. Ganito ang senaryo kapag ang mga kapwa pasahero ay walang pakialam o tinatamad mag-abot ng bayad. May hindi marunong umusog at hindi pagpansin sa mga nanghihingi ng limos. Binabaling ang kanilang tingin sa iba o kaya ay nagsasagawa ng ilang bagay kagaya ng pagseselpon. Isa pang sitwasyon ng walang pakialam ay sa mga drayber na napakabilis magpatakbo ng dyip kaya may mga pasaherong hindi nahihiyang magsalita para paalalahanan ang drayber na magdahandahan sa pagmamaneho. Naibahagi pa nga ng isa na mayroon siyang karanasan na hindi pa nakakababa ang pasahero ay pinaandar na kaagad ng drayber ang dyip kaya nahulog ito.

# Pagkagalit at Pagdadabog
- Obserbasyon ng isa sa mga lalabintaunin na may ilang nagagalit na pasahero kung hindi agad nasusunod ang isinagawang pagpára lalo na kung may kalayuan ito mula sa kanyang dapat na babaan. Pinapatulan din ng drayber kung minsan ang mga pasaherong mainit ang ulo sa pagbababa sa kanila sa alanganing daan o lugar o hindi itinatabi at kung saan na lang abutin ng pagpara. Hindi alintana ang aksidente na maaaring kaharapin ng kanilang pasahero. Makikita rin sa mukha ng drayber mula sa repleksyon ng salamin ang pagka-inis o pagkayamot sa pasaherong hindi agad nakabababa ng dyip. Kung hindi naman narinig agad ng drayber ang pagpára, padabog na tinutuktok ng pasahero ang bubong ng dyip at nagsasalita ng pára. Madalas na makita ang ganitong sitwasyon sa mga drayber at pasaherong maikli ang pasensya na nagbubunga ng pagkagalit at pagdadabog.

## Tsismisan
- Madalas ay nadadala ng mga pasahero ang kuwento ng buhay nang may buhay sa loob ng dyip. Batay sa sariling karanasan ng lalabintaunin ay minsan nilang napag-tsismisan ng kanyang kaklase ang isa pang kaklase sa loob ng dyip na hindi nila namalayan ay nasa unahan nakapuwesto malapit sa drayber.
- Dagdag pa rin sa tsismisan ang malakas na boses na nakagagambala sa katahimikan o saglit na pamamahinga ng ibang pasahero habang bumabyahe. Ang saglit na kuwentuhan ng drayber sa kapwa drayber kapag nagkatapat sila sa kahabaan ng trapik tungkol sa matumal na pasahero, tinitimbreng enforcer, trapik, at mga nagpapabarya ay nakaaabala rin sa pasahero.

## Siksikan at Singitan
- Ordinaryong tagpuan na sa paradahan ng dyip ang pakiusap ng barker sa pag-usog para ipilit na pagkasyahin ang mga pasahero na wawaluhin lamang sa upuan ay nagiging siyaman o sampuan lalo na kung maninipis ang kanilang katawan. 
- Para sa mga drayber, ito ay dagdag kita sa kanila lalo na kung nakapila at nagbabayad sila ng butaw kahit pa magsiksikan na parang isang lata ng sardinas ang kanyang mga pasahero. Normal na pangitain na ito sa loob ng dyip, ang mga pasaherong siksikan sa upuan. Kaya may pasaherong iuurong ng konti palabas ang kanyang likod para makaupo nang maayos ang katabing kapwa pasahero. 
- Hindi naman uso ang diskuwento sa dyip kahit kalahati na lamang ang nakaupo. Kapag ikaw naman ay nagmamadali ay hindi mo na alintana kung nakaupo ka nang maayos o hindi. Marami ring mapagsamantala sa pagsakay sa dyip. Pinagsasamantalahan ang gipit na sitwasyong pinagdadaanan ng pasahero.
- Sa siksikan at singitan lumalabas din ang pagsasamantala ng mga malalakas sa mahihinang pasahero. Mabilis na nakauupo ang malalaki at malalakas ang katawan na kadalasan ay mga lalaki. 
- Malimit na dehado naman ang mga senior citizen, PWD, buntis, mga magulang na may bitbit na sanggol o may mga hawak na bata, at mga mag-aaral na hindi marunong makipagsiksikan.

## Budol
- Umaakyat din sa dyip ang mga batang pulubi na may panlinis ng sapatos pagkatapos ay hihingi na ng limos kapalit ang maikling serbisyo mula sa pakunwaring pagpupunas ng sapatos. 
- Si ate naman na nakadamit ng puti at biglang sisingit sa upuan, may dala-dalang bibliya, magbabasa ng berso at magbabahagi ng salita ng Diyos kasabay ang pagpapasa ng maliliit na sobre para sa abuloy. 
- Si kuya naman na may kuwentong pang “Maalala Mo Kaya” tungkol sa kapamilyang nasa ospital at magpapakita ng bayarin upang makahingi ng limos. 
- Ayon sa mga lalabintaunin ay modus operandi na ito kung tutuusin na mahirap paniwalaan dahil sa ilang beses nilang karanasan ay nakikita na nila itong panlalamang sa kapwa. Ito ang iba’t ibang uri ng pambubudol o panloloko sa kapwa na nagdudulot ng pananamlay sa pagtulong sa kapwa dahil sa pagdududa kung totoo ba ang sinasabi ng mga nanlilimos o hindi.

## Lamangan
- Sa kabila ng bigayan ay kapansin-pansin din ang eksena ng lamangan sa loob ng dyip tulad ng “123” na ibig sabihin ay pagtakbo sa pagbabayad. 
- May pasaherong kunwaring nagabot ng bayad pero kulang naman at sasabayan nang mabilis na pagbaba sa dyip.
- Ang lamangan sa dyip ay oportunidad upang maging mapanuri sa iba’t ibang karanasang ito na realidad ng buhay sa lipunang Pilipino. Pagbabahagi ng isang lalabintaunin na nasa kanila na kung paano nila ipoproseso sa sarili ang kanilang danas. Nagkomento naman ang iba na mahalagang manaig pa rin ang pagiging mabuting tao lalo na sa kanyang kapwa pasahero sa lahat ng pagkakataon.

## Pakutuban
- Nabanggit nilang may halong pangambang nabubuo kaya hindi nila maialis na maging mapagmatyag sa kanilang paligid lalo na kung gabi at madalang na ang tao sa kalsada habang sila ay nakasakay sa dyip.
- Bunga ito ng mga napapanood sa balita o kaya ay mga itinatampok na eksena sa mga pelikula kagaya ng panghoholdap. Nilinaw naman ng mga lalabintauning hindi naman ito palagian, subalit mainam nang maging mapagmatyag at palagiang handa kung may mga ganitong hindi inaasahang pangyayari. Dagdag pa nila na sa panahon ngayon, mahirap husgahan kung sino ang may masamang balak sa mga taong nakakasama sa dyip sapagkat maging bata, matanda, babae o lalaki man ay napababalitang nagiging biktima ng mga ganitong insidente sa dyip.

# Quilantang, 2024
- The jeepney, a widely utilised mode of public transportation, not only serves as a means of transport but also embodies Filipino culture, identity, and social stories. It is essential to recognise that vehicles, such as jeepneys, do not merely serve as neutral modes of transportation, but rather play an active role in shaping and being shaped by society. 
- The jeepney, a distinctive form of transportation unique to the Philippines, is rooted in the aftermath of World War 2 when the Americans left remnants of their equipment.
- Originally named as Willy’s Jeep, it was designed as a lightweight military vehicle to navigate rugged terrain and carry troops and supplies; resourceful Filipinos repurposed and customised them to adapt to the country’s post-war needs. These modified vehicles were imbued with local aesthetics and decorated with ornate and vivid designs, transforming them into mobile canvases for Filipino folk art, symbols, and inscriptions that reflected the country’s cultural identity, aspirations, and creative spirit. Today, the jeepney symbolises Filipino ingenuity, innovation, and resilience, and is no longer just a modified version of the American military jeep.
- Drawing aesthetic inspiration from the casco (a covered riverboat variant popular during the Spanish era) and the calesa (an intricately designed horse carriage that still exists today), the jeepney blends history, functionality, and artistic expression into a uniquely Filipino narrative
- Drawing aesthetic inspiration from the casco (a covered riverboat variant popular during the Spanish era) and the calesa (an intricately designed horse carriage that still exists today), the jeepney blends history, functionality, and artistic expression into a uniquely Filipino narrative (Torres 14-17)
- The concept of mobility goes beyond just physical movement. It also includes the circulation of symbols, ideas, and cultural narratives. Jeepneys in the Philippines are not just a means of transportation, but they also act as vehicles of cultural mobility. They are moving canvases that display and transport diverse cultural symbols throughout the urban landscape.
- Jeepney decorations are a diverse and colourful representation of Filipino culture, values, and aspirations. These decorations convey a vibrant narrative of Filipino life and experiences through a combination of various motifs. 
- This section looks into the primary themes embodied in these motifs, including love and sex, driving speed, economic success, religion, and family.
- Still, they also communicate complex cultural messages while on the move. Through the intricate fusion of traditional, contemporary, and global influences visible on these mobile canvases, we embark on a journey to decode the symbols and understand the stories that jeepneys tell as they traverse the busy streets of the Philippines.
- Additionally, the artistry and craftsmanship of decorating jeepneys is truly remarkable. Both jeepney owners and artists take great pride in their work, creating intricate designs that artfully depict historical events, religious icons, landscapes, and local traditions. These designs serve as a means of artistic expression and storytelling, showcasing the Philippines’ incredible creativity and cultural heritage. From these perspectives, the jeepney is not just a symbol but an agent of culture, embodying and transporting cultural narratives across the nation.
- The phase-out of traditional jeepneys may disrupt the cultural exchanges, social interactions, and economic activities that unfold within these vehicles. Moreover, the proposed standardised designs of modern jeepneys may create uniform and monotonous public spaces, thereby impacting the aesthetic experiences of city dwellers and commuters.

## Love and Sex
- This theme is often represented by images of attractive women or text that sexualises them. These symbols reflect societal norms around beauty, romance, desire, and gender roles. These depictions can range from innocent flirtation to more overt sexualisation, suggesting the pervasive influence of patriarchal norms and the male gaze in public spaces.
- Prominently displayed images and texts of sexualised females echo the societal norms and attitudes towards love and sex (Meñez 46), as also observed by Torres. These images, placed on the jeepney’s interior and exterior, signal a more liberal societal perspective, illuminating the dialogic relationship between popular culture and the traditional cultural surroundings.
- Torres also refers to it as the Machismo or masculine culture of Filipinos. The jeepney coincidentally is also refer as hari ng kalsada (king of the road), further signifying its assigned gender. With its vibrant, loud, and imposing presence, the jeepney is often seen as a symbol of masculinity. Its colourful, rugged exterior, the roar of its engine, and the thrill of manoeuvring through dense city traffic all contribute to the image of the jeepney as a masculine entity.
- The masculine connotation is further underscored by the fact that jeepney driving, a profession predominantly occupied by men, requires physical strength, courage, and assertiveness, characteristics stereotypically associated with masculinity.
- As these symbols are not stationary, they move through public spaces as part of the jeepney, actively disseminating and reinforcing these norms (Pearce 56). In relation to the gendered symbols, the depictions of women, whether innocent or sexualised, are not stationary. They move within the public space as an integral part of the jeepney. As these images travel through urban and rural areas, they engage with the public, actively disseminating and reinforcing societal norms around beauty, romance, desire, and gender roles. The mobility of these images amplifies their impact as they become a consistent and widespread aspect of the visual landscape, contributing to the public’s collective understanding and reinforcement of these norms.

## Driving Speed
- Speed motifs on jeepneys, such as chrome miniature wings, missiles, birds, and aeroplanes, offer a fascinating entry point for understanding Filipino culture and society. 
- These symbols directly refer to speed, power, and motion—elements inherently associated with the vehicle itself and its function as a mode of transport. The wings, for instance, denote the concept of flight, representing high speed and freedom (Torres 14-18). Similarly, missiles signify swiftness and power, while birds and airplanes serve as universal emblems of fast travel.
- Moreover, the emphasis on speed also mirrors broader societal dynamics. In the fast-paced urban setting where jeepneys operate, speed may connote efficiency, competitiveness, and a relentless drive to keep up with the demands of daily life.

## Success
- Aspirations for economic success are often symbolised on jeepneys through images of money, popular brand logos, and representations of successful individuals or high-status objects (Meñez). These symbols carry meanings related to wealth, prosperity, and economic achievement. In the broader Filipino socio-economic context, these symbols can represent aspirations for financial stability, upward mobility, and the desire to transcend socio-economic challenges (Blanton).

## Religion
- Religious figures such as the Sacred Heart of Jesus, the Virgin Mary, and other saints grace many jeepneys, reflecting the strong religious fabric that undergirds the Filipino society (Blanton; Olivares). An essential component of jeepney decorations is inscribing Bible verses on different vehicle parts.
- uch inscriptions bear testament to the deep religious faith permeating the Filipino society. These verses, often chosen personally by the drivers or owners, are considered sources of inspiration, guidance, and protection during their daily journeys. Using these symbols signals the significance of Catholicism in the Philippines, a heritage of Spanish colonisation. It indicates how deeply ingrained these religious beliefs are in the daily life and public spaces of Filipinos. These symbols do not merely represent abstract religious concepts but actively shape the behaviours and interactions of the drivers. For instance, a driver may feel a sense of divine protection and moral guidance when driving a jeepney adorned with religious icons, influencing their behaviour on the road.
- Ultimately, the religious icons on jeepneys extend beyond their immediate religious meanings. These symbols illustrate how faith, identity, and public life are interconnected in the Filipino context.

## Family
- Family plays a crucial role in Filipino culture and is often symbolically represented on jeepneys (Flores). Symbols such as family portraits, names, and depictions of familyoriented activities frequently adorn jeepneys. These icons bear a direct meaning linked to the concept of family and kinship. 
- However, these symbols also embody Filipinos’ deep value on family relationships and the role of the family as a source of motivation and strength.
- In the context of the jeepney driver, the symbols often represent their connection to their loved ones, reminding them of whom they work hard for and why they persist in a challenging occupation.
- For passengers, these symbols elicit a sense of empathy and connection, acknowledging that the driver is not just a service provider but a person with a family relying on them. This understanding can positively influence the interactions between drivers and passengers, promoting a sense of community and shared human experience. Additionally, the prominence of family symbols on jeepneys can reflect the collective Filipino identity, which highly values familial ties and obligations.

## ## PUVMP
- The Public Utility Vehicle Modernization Program (PUVMP) was introduced by the Department of Transportation (DOTr) in the Philippines back in 2017. Its primary objective is to replace conventional jeepneys with safer, more comfortable, and eco-friendly alternatives (Talabong). However, while this move towards modernisation holds the promise of a more streamlined and effective public transportation system, it also brings about questions regarding the future of these iconic vehicles as jeepneys are deeply embedded in the Filipino automotive culture and landscape.
- The Department of Transportation (DOTr) of the Philippines launched the Public Utility Vehicle Modernization Program (PUVMP) in 2017, the most extensive transportation reform initiative by the government to date (Talabong). The programme aims to replace old, dilapidated jeepneys with safer, more comfortable, and environmentally-friendly vehicles. Although the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic put this programme on hold temporarily, the government resumed its push for the modernisation programme in 2023 (The Manila Bulletin Team).
- The PUVMP, while promoting efficiency, safety, and environmental conservation, also raises questions regarding the potential cultural implications of this overhaul. The iconic jeepney, a vibrant symbol of Filipino resilience, ingenuity, and identity, is at risk of gradually disappearing from urban landscapes, supplanted by uniform, standardised vehicles (Suarez 204).
- Its unique blend of creativity and historical legacy symbolises the Filipino spirit of innovation, adaptation, and community. The potential erasure of this symbol and the icons enshrined with it from urban landscapes could impact the richness and diversity of Filipino culture not just indigenously but also on the global stage (Meñez 42).
- While the move towards modernisation and sustainability in the transportation sector is necessary and holds numerous advantages, the potential cultural implications of this shift require careful consideration. Progress must not inadvertently lead to the erasure of cultural identity and heritage. As the nation moves forward, preserving cultural symbols and the rich narratives they encompass should also be a concern.
- However, it has yet to delve into the modernisation programme’s broader societal, economic, and environmental implications. In response, the government, in its modernisation efforts, could engage with local artists, designers, and cultural practitioners to develop standardised designs for the new vehicles that incorporate and re-imagine traditional jeepney art. They could also engage with jeepney drivers and operators, passengers, and community members to gain insights into the cultural symbols that are most relevant and significant to them. This bottom-up approach to design would ensure that the new vehicles are more efficient and safer and continue to reflect Filipino culture and identity.
- Additionally, a system could be established to allow drivers or operators to personalise a portion of their vehicles, providing a canvas for individual expression, much like traditional jeepneys. This would serve as a testament to the resilience and creativity of the Filipino people, reinforcing national identity amidst the backdrop of modernity.
- Moreover, developing a national database or museum dedicated to preserving and displaying jeepney art could be another viable solution. This would allow future generations to appreciate jeepney art’s cultural richness and significance, even as the country moves towards modernisation.

# Parrucho, 2023
- according to the Move as One Coalition, only 30% of Filipinos rely on private vehicles, leaving 70% of Filipinos to rely on publictransportation. Along with this, Dr. Montalbo Jr.'s paper states that 8,959,000 people use public utility jeepneys (PUJ) and 1,865,000 people ride public utility buses (PUB), making Jeepneys the primary mode of transportation among Filipinos. There are currently around 179,000, with 90% being fifteen years or older (Mateo-Babiano et al., 2020).
- The Philippine jeepney can be traced back to the immediate aftermath of World War II (Antonio, 1982). The United States military left a surplus of military jeeps in the Philippines at the end of the war. These jeeps were originally intended for military use, transporting troops during the war. However, after the military left, the jeeps were repurposed and transformed intopublic utility vehicles to address the Filipino people's post-war transportation needs.
- The term "jeepney" is thought to be a combination of "jeep" and "jitney" (Braganza, Liwanag, and Palines, 2007). "Jeep" refers to the original military vehicle, while "jitney" is a term used in the United States to describe small buses or vans used for public transportation.
- The jeepney represents Philippine culture (Meñez, 1988), and identity (Cerio, 2017). It serves as a reminder of our historyto visitors from other countries. The vibrant and colorful exterior design of the jeepney is one of its distinguishing features. Owners and drivers of Jeepneys took pride in customizing and decorating their vehicles with bright paint, ornate chrome decorations, and personalized artwork. The jeepney was transformed into a moving work of art by these artistic embellishments, which frequently featured religious symbols, national icons, and local cultural motifs (Cerio, 2017).

## Themes
1. Learning from Others
	- The first sub-theme narrated the lesson that commuters learned from their fellow passengers while riding in a Jeepney. According to the data gathered, participants are constantly confronted with various types of people and scenarios that they find most helpful in remaining open-minded and considerate of others.
	- According to the data gathered, the participants' primary Jeepney experience is learning from others. Mondal and Samanta (2021) stated that there are infinite lessons that commuters can learn from their surroundings during their commute journey.
	- According to McMahan (2013), everyone has gone through experiences in life that can help the lives of others.
2. Relating with People
	- The second sub-theme highlights the shared experiences they heard and saw from their fellow commuters which results in relating with them. Riding a Jeepney helped participants feel understood and find a single person who truly understands their situation. The data collected shows that commuting validates what they are experiencing, and they felt heard and less alone as a result.
	- According to Moskaliuk, Bokhorst, and Cress (2016), learning from others is dependent on people's ability to integrate their own and other people's experiences. This not only allows them to sympathize with others but also to empathize and connect with them. 
	- Riding in a Jeepney made participants feel understood and helped them find a single person who truly understands their situation.
3. Spontaneous Humor
	- The first sub-theme is about the spontaneous Filipino humor that is reflected in Jeepney. The participants stated that regardless of the situation, commuters are capable of finding something to laugh at and make jokes about, particularly a group of friends who will make fun of anything and anyone
	- most participants stated that commuters make fun of a variety of things, turning even the most innocuous joke into a source of endless entertainment. De Leon (2013) mentioned the humor inside the Jeepney includes witty, humorous, and occasionally offensive jokes and quotations. 
	- It simply implies that no matter what the situation, Filipinos can find something to laugh about. De Los Santos, Labrague, and Milla (2020) also stated that Filipinos have a sanguine temperament and a sunny disposition. This suggests that Filipinos know how to deal with setbacks positively.
4. Religious Expression
	- The second sub-theme features the inside and outside of a Jeepney as a venue for religious expression. As stated by participants, religious icons, rosary beads, and daily prayer were among the specific ways of expressing faith observed during the rides. Based on the data collected, the dashboard is frequently used as a miniature altar space.
	- Filipino society has a strong religious faith (Canete, 2021). According to the responses of the participants, Jeepney demonstrates that Filipinos still believe in superstition and have a strong faith in God. Basedon the findings of Güss and Tuason's (2008) study, the Manila Jeepney had more religious decorations and accessories. According to the 2020 census of population and housing, 78.8% of Filipinos are Roman Catholics, which explains why most designs and arts reflected in Jeepneys are Catholic symbols and names. Mercado (1994) revealed that the front of the driver typically has a small altar with a rosary, a small statue/picture of the Blessed Virgin, Santo Ñino, Sacred Heart, or a crucifix. This is a sort of roadside protection, as well as a daily prayer for a dream or the success of the family. Thus, according to Blanton (2015), the Jeepney is an important representation vehicle in the religious life of the country.
5. Artistic Expression
	- The third sub-theme focuses on the Jeepney, which serves as a canvas for Filipino artistic expression. Based on the data gathered, these have been illustrated with different artworks, including paintings and slogans. Furthermore, according to the participants, some Jeepney ornamentals are made from reinvented scrap and transformed into something new and useful.
	- Jeepneys serve as canvases for Filipino artistic expression. Owners customize their vehicles with graffiti, line art, anime, and portraits. Some even incorporate K-pop culture celebrities, political personalities, or religious themes. According to Mercado (1994), the owner might reflect his feelings, worth, and overall personality onto them. Some Jeepney ornaments were made of recycled materials, according to participants. This means that Filipinos may improvise and reuse scraps and abandoned resources to create new and valuable products (Su and Tanyag, 2020).
6. Caring for the Elderly
	- The first sub-theme focuses on caring for the elderly as a Filipino value demonstrated during a Jeepney ride. From the gathered data, the care for the elderly is performed through assistance by younger commuters and by giving up seats for those in need.
	- the primary Filipino value that was evident in jeepney rides was care for the elderly. According to Oropilla and Guadana (2021), the elderly or "senior citizens" are treated with the utmost respect in Philippine culture. Senior citizens and elders have the closest seats to the entrance, allowing them to easily sit and go. The DOTR issued Department Order No. 2014- 013 directing senior citizens, pregnant women, and people with disabilities to be given priority seating in public transportation, particularly jeepneys and buses. Younger passengers assist the elderly in boarding or bear heavy loads. This suggests that Filipinos place a high cultural value on age and the elderly (Teng et al., 2021).
7. *Bayanihan*
	- The second sub-theme describes Jeepney's bayanihan culture. According to the participants, there is no hesitation in assisting a passenger to load or unload a large bag and in passing on the fare from the farthest point of the cabin to the driver in front. Furthermore, there is always someone who will respond to a passenger's question.
	- An act of bayanihan in the jeepney is the distinct gesture of payments inside jeepneys where one helps pass payments and change down the aisle to and from the driver and passenger. Blanton (2015) emphasized the practice of always lending a helping hand to commuters when a specific passenger is out of reach to pay his fare to the driver. In relation to this, commuters assist their fellow passengers by carrying their heavy loadsand baggage, as well as assisting them to get on and off the Jeep when the passenger is elderly or has a child. According to Sirauno’s (2021) study, Filipinos strongly believe in assisting their fellow countrymen in any way they can.

## Blanton, 2015
- The Jeepney is a small bus carrying around 20 passengers seated facing one another  on two benches running parallel to the length of the vehicle. In the urban transportation literature, the Jeepney has been categorized as a form of paratransit. This term  emerged in the early 1970s to describe unconventional forms of transportation, that,  opposed to city buses and commuter trains, operated outside the conventional fixed route genre. *Kirby et al., Paratransit; Cervero, Informal Transport; Rimmer, Role of Paratransit; Rimmer, Rikisha to Rapid Transit.* At its most basic level, paratransit describes creative forms of mobility  that emerge when large bureaucracies and their concomitant infrastructures of transportation fail to meet the demands of the commuting public. With the increasing  inefficiency of state sanctioned systems of bus and light rail, the Jeepney has flourished to become a ubiquitous presence on the extremely congested streets of Manila.
- In terms of its historical background, the Jeepney represents a creative re-assemblage of components of the American war machine. More specifically, thousands of all-terrain vehicles know as “jeeps” were abandoned as surplus throughout the Philippines after the Second World War. With remarkable ingenuity, these surplus vehicles were modified with an elongated bed and new roof in order to provided much-needed public transportation  vehicles for a country whose infrastructure had been decimated by the war. Yet what was only meant to be a temporary fix to the infrastructural woes of the Philippines not only persisted throughout the second half of the twentieth century, but the general form of these early Jeepneys still persists as the most popular form of public  transportation throughout the Philippines.

# Religion
- The Jeepney is not only the dominant mode of public transportation in Manila, but a crucial representational vehicle in the religious life of the city. Since at least the  early 1950s, the exterior of the Jeepney has been an important site of Filipino folk  art, featuring symbols of speed and masculinity such as abstract representations of  rooster wings creatively “split” around the exterior panels of the vehicle folk art coincided with new charismatic Christian and evangelical religious movements that packed large coliseums and enlivened new communities of collective effervescence in Manila in the mid 1980s. Directly coincident with these new religious  movements, the metallic surface of the Jeepney became filled with brightly colored  spray paint lettering proclaiming pious slogans such as “Praise the Lord!” “Prayer  Warrior” and “Power of Prayer”. Likewise, these movements signaled  an increasing orientation of the Jeepneys’ exterior space of visual representation  around the themes of the Virgin Mary [Roman Catholic], biblical characters, and prayer [predominantly evangelical and charismatic Christian]. 
- These mobile Marian apparitions reflect the shrines located just to the side of  the road in residential neighborhoods throughout Manila. Many of these shrines display a ceramic statue of Mary adorned with silk flowers and surrounded by the residual traces of wax from the burning of votive candles. From her  niche of cobblestone and mortar, Mary casts a plangent gaze toward the crossroads.
- At night her shrine is anointed by the sallow luminescence of a soot-stained light  bulb: a sacred beacon on streets prone to accident, contingency and breakdown.  
- As vehicle of religious representation, the Jeepney marks the proliferation of pious  visual culture within urban public space. Through the mobile surfaces of the Jeepney,  the presence of pious imagery has transitioned from the private devotional shrine  of the domestic interior and the candlelit space of the Cathedral and, quite literally,  taken to the street. As an apparatus of mobile piety, the Jeepney takes the annual Festival procession of the Saints and plunges this pious imagery into the vibrant  circulation of everyday life.
- This urban transit research describes how these new forms of pious imagery are  not merely a passive reflection of religious movements occurring around them in the  spaces of churches, cathedrals and public coliseums; rather, these vibrant images themselves actively refashion the urban landscape into an enchanted mobile network  of miraculous Marian apparitions, fervent communal prayer, and pious exhortations.  In this way, the infrastructure of public transportation becomes an apparatus of  urban belief, mapping the grid and the informal economies of everyday life that take  place upon its asphalt surface with sacred visions shrouded in delicate plumes of dust  and diesel fumes.
- In terms of infrastructure and materiality, the Jeepney is not only a ‘vehicle’ of  representation, but the form of the technology itself is ‘quickened’ or actuated by the  force of religious community and the experience of sacred presence. For an example  of the way religion is fabricated into the very materiality of the infrastructure, we  could take the flying dove, a symbol of the immanent power of the Holy Spirit in the  Christian tradition – descending through the polished steel surface of a Jeepney side panel
- In this instance, religious representation and instrumental function become indistinguishable within the shimmering form of “stainless” steel. Thus the idea of divine communication and the miraculous traffic between the sacred and the everyday has  become so sedimented within the history of the Jeepney that it is now “fabricated”  into the structure of the machine in the independent manufacturing and assembly  garages located around the city. This “stainless” steel suggests a promising method to  describe and theorize urban infrastructure in many developing countries, not merely  as an assemblage of bureaucratic practices and technical instrumentalities whose  functions can be calculated, consciously managed and rationally controlled, but as a  machine ensemble whose “functioning” is undergirded by an excessive underbelly of  miraculous appearances, prayers, and prestige.
- Guarding over this coin box is a reliquary of devotional objects: rosaries swaying to  the rhythmic ensemble of combustion engines and traffic lights, a small statue of the  Santo Niño in his gesture of divine wisdom, perfumed garlands of freshly-blessed  flowers, printed images of the saints, and small woven curtains featuring pious  phrases such as “God is Love.” As previously mentioned, the communal practice of  fare collection culminates at the base of this shrine, an offering that not only ensures  that one maintains a legitimate space within the Jeepney, but a metaphysical insurance of safe passage on urban streets prone to accident, breakdown and contingency

## Bayad Po
- Jeepney  and negotiated her way through a sea of knees and the baggage of seated travelers,  she takes a seat on one of the two crowded rows and exclaims “byad po!”, (meaning  literally “take it, friend”), extending a fist of coins – usually no more than 15 pesos  per person (about 33 US cents) – in the direction of the driver. If the payee is not  located within reach of the backwardly extended hand of the driver or his front seat  assistant, other passengers will assist in the passing of the coins to the front of the  vehicle. In an age when the collection of transportation fares and tolls is mediated  by sophisticated systems of analysis and calculation increasingly abstracted from the  communal experience of the passengers (electronic swipe cards and remote barcode  scanners, for example), the collection of fares within this space initiates a unique  form of urban sociality through exchanges of hand. *For a useful introduction to the history of systems of fare collection, see: Miller, Fares, Please!* Not only are 3-5 individuals  physically involved in this payment process of passing coin to and from the payee,  but this communal payment structure elicits the attention of the other passengers  not directly involved in the process – who are so cramped and facing one another on  the opposed benches that they can’t help but observe this transaction. This gesture  of payment and the concomitant act of grasping and letting go, culminates in the  clinking sound of coin as it falls into a hand-made box located in the center of the  dash board

## Sex
- Although much controversy has been fomented as  of late from large outdoor advertisements featuring images of “sexualized” bodies  and verbal sexual innuendo, these visual examples pale in comparison to the highly  eroticized images of women often featured on the side panels of the Jeepney. In fact,  the voluptuous images of anime cartoons and other figures of male fantasy often  appear alongside images of the Virgin Mary. In a kind of surrealist profanation, the  ecstatic countenance of the erotic cartoon image suggests an expression that is also  visually depicted on the face of many Jeepney images of the Virgin.